Statistics is the mathematical study of making meaning out of data.
Therefore, it's pretty appropriate that we start with understanding
what data is. In this course, and in much of statistics, we will start
with a data set. This is a specific kind of collection of information
with a specific structure. We'll start to understand that structurein
this video.

SLIDE

Let's start with an example. In a certain clinical trial, a study was
done to understand whether stents help to prevent strokes. A stent is
a small tube placed inside an artery, usually in and around the heart.
They are often used to aid recovery after a heart attack, but
ensuring blood flow through critial coronal arteries. However, there
is some evidence that they may have other benefits as well, including
possibly minimizing risk of a stroke. 

The researches designed an experiment. 451 patients whose were
identified as at risk for stroke for randomly assigned to one of two
groups, as it standard for a controlled trial. Patients in the control
group received medical management -- medication, support, lifestyle
changes and the like. Patients in the treatment group also received
this same medical managment, but in addition were given a stent place
in an important artery. Then, of course, data was collected on the
outcomes for both groups, producing a dataset. 

SLIDE

What data did they gather? For each pattient, two points of data were
gathered: whether they had a stroke within 30 days of starting the
experiment, and the same but withint 365 days. The table here shows
the first five patients, which of the two groups they were in, and
whether or not they had strokes within the two time periods. 

There are two terms to define here. Statistics is pretty heavy on the
vocabulary, which is honestly one of the major challenges of the
discipline. The definitions here are `case' and 'variable'. A variable
is something that is measured in the data set. Whether the patient had
a stroke after 30 days is a variable, in this case, a yes/no variable.
Likewise for after 365 dase. A case is an individual situation in the
data set. Here, it is an individual patient. Patient 2 is a case, as
it patient 5. 

In this spreadsheet-like setup, cases are rows and variables are
columns. This isn't always the case; rows and columns can be switched,
so be careful reading data sets and interpreting them. 

SLIDE

A data set is just data, raw information. What does it mean? This is
what the whole discipline of statistics is about. We analyze the data
set and try to draw conclusions. 

There are many, many ways to analyze data. Here, I m counting up
the totals for the variables of whether or not a stroke occured and I
am grouping them by the group variable: control or treatment. I get
these numbers. I can try to make some observations and I immediately
notes that those with treatment actually had more instances. Whether
or not this is something causal happening here, or whether this is
just random change, is a question we get to later in the course. For
now, this is just a good example of one way to try to analyze this
data set and maybe draw some conclusions.

SLIDE

Now for some more vocabulary. We want to talk about the kinds of data
in a data set. In particular, the kinds of variables, since variable
are the raw measurements we are making in the data set. Here is a data
set dealing with various demographic information for counties in the
United States. I've show four cases and the data set has six
variables. What kind of variables are these?

First distinction: there are categorical variable and numerical
variables. Categorical variables are, unsurprisingly, about
categories. Any set of categories can work, but the valubes for each
variable are the categories. State name is a categorical variable, with
values being the 50 states. Median education is a categorical
variable, with the categories being things like some college education
or high school diploma. These categories have been constructed and
chosen for the study. 

There are two types of categorical variables that we'll deal with in
this course and both are demonstrated here. State name is a nominal
categorical variable: the category is a list of names. (Nominal is
from the latin root for name.) Names are, in general, unordered. You
could order them, but they are not intrinsically ordered. Median
educations, on the other hand, is an ordinal category: there is an
intrinsic ordering to the category, moving from less to more
education. Some college is more than a high school diploma, where are
alabama is not more of a state that california. 

That's categorical variables. There are also numerical variables. The
three middle variables here are all numerical: their values are
numbers. Again, there are two types of numerical variable here.
Population is a discrete variable. Throughout mathematics, discrete
always means separated numbers with gaps inbetween them. Here, the
variable is measured in whole numbers, so there are gaps between each
whole number. There is not such thing at a fifth of a person, so the
data doesn't allow intermediate values. Unemployement rate, on the
other hand, is a continuous numerical variable. It can take any
intermediate value, up to whatever decimal precision we want. This
3.86 could be 3.87 or 3.85 -- conceptually, there are no restrictions
to intermediate values. 

SLIDE

To summarize, in this course the variables in data sets break down as
follows. Variables are either numerical, actual numbers, or
categorical, some other labels than numbers. Then numbers are
discrete, separated numbers without allowing inbetween values or
continuous where all inbetween values are possible. Categorical
variables are ordinal, where there is a natural ordering of the
categories, or nominal, where any ordering is somewhat arbitrary. 

As I said, vocabulary is one of the main challenges in statistics.
This is just the start of the terms we will define in this course. I
encourage you to keeps careful notes or make your own glossary to
remember all the terms. 

























