The previous two videos were the start of out path into inferential
statistics: trying to make some conclusion about the relationship
behind the data. This video moves into the most important definition
of inferential statistics: hypothesis testing. We want to understand
the basic idea and definition in this video.

SLIDE

I'll present this by example. A certain study had this research
question: do male bank managers discriminate against female employees
in promotion decisions?

What is the population? Recall the population for a research question
is all of the possible cases. Here, the question is about promotion
decisions made by male managers. Therefore, the population is
precisely that: all promotion decisions made by all male bank
managers. (You could argue that the population be limited, maybe to
only banks in Canada. That would also be reasonable.) 

That's the population. What is the sample? Recall that the sample is
the actual data: the portion of the population that we know something
about. In this study, the sample was 48 specific promotion decisions
that the researchers were aware of. 

SLIDE

The dataset, then, has 48 cases. Each case was two variables: gender
and decision. Both are nominal categorical with two categories: gender
split between men and women, and decision split between promoted and
not promoted. The gender refers to the gender of the applicant:
remember, that study is only about male managers, so that part is
fixed. 

Here is the contingency table for these two variables. Of the 48
cases, exactly half were men and half were women under consideration
for promotion. You can see from the table how many were actually
promoted. I can read this as proportions: 87.5 percent of the men
were promoted and 58.3 percent of the women were promoted. The
different between these two proportion is 0.292 or 29.2%. 

SLIDE

Let's make sense of this 0.292 proportional difference. Again, the
population is all instances of promotion decisions made by a male bank
manager. I can use p_m for the value, in the entire population, of how
many men were promoted, as a proportion. (Proportion is important here
for comparison, since the number of promotion applicants in the entire
population is not guaranteed to be perfectly split between men and
women.) 

Again, I can use p_f for the proportion of the women who were promoted
in this situation. And, as I did in the last slide, I can date the
difference. This is a measure of how much men were promoted more often
than women. 

This is a parameter. Recall the definition: a parameter is a fact
about the entire population. Parameters are unknown: the study did
not, in fact, look at every possible promotion decisions for all male
bank managers everywhere. It only looked at 48 decisions, a tiny
fraction of the whole. Statistics is about trying to say something
about the unknown parameter using partial information. 

So we have a sample that I've already described. What I calculated on
the previous slide is the sample statistic: it is something which is
true about this sample. In this sample, there was a 29.2% difference
in how often men and women were promoted. The question, as always, is
this: is the sample statistic representative of the parameter. Does
this study capture something that is likely to be true about the whole
population. 

SLIDE

Hypothesis testing is how this question is formally setup. The setup
is a bit strange, but there are good reasons for it. Hypothesis
testing always starts with a null hypothesis. This is default
situation and it always says that there is no relationship between the
data. Nothing is really going on here. This is always the default
since the vast majority of variable in the world are not directly
connected. The canada goose population in Ontario has nothing to do
with the price of lager in restaurants in Rome. In this case, the null
hypothesis says that there is no difference, in the whole
population, between the promotion rates or men and women (under the
decision of a male manager. This can be stated mathematically: p_m and
p_f were the promotion proportions, so the null hypothesis says the
difference is zero. 

Hypothesis testing always starts with the null hypothesis: some
version of saying that nothing is going on with this data. The purpose
of a research study is to reject the null hypothesis, so say there is
something going on.

This gets stated as the alternative hypothesis. Here, it says that the
variables "gender" and "decision" in this data set are not
independent: they point to an actual different in the whole
population. That is, the parameter p_m - p_f is actually larger than
zero. Men to get promoted at a higher rate than women, at least under
male managers. 

(You could argue that the alternative hypothesis should be even more
broad. It should be the negation of the null hypothesis, so maybe just
that this parameter is non-zero. Maybe in the whole population, women
actually have a higher promotion rate. This version of the alternative
hypothesis would allow for that reality as well)

This is the setup of hypothesis testing. Understand what the
population is, what the parameter is, and how the sample statistic is
a limited measure of the paremeter in the sample. Make an null
hypothesis: some version of saying that, in the whole population,
there is no relationship between the data. Maybe an alternative
hypothesis, saying there is a relationship. Then figure out if the
sample statistic actually supports the alternative hypothesis. That's
it for this video, which just defined the terms and set the stage. The
next videos will start actually answering the question. 
