Alright, now we know what a null hypothesis and an alternative
hypothesis are. A research study wants to determine if tn alternative
hypothesis holds. How does it do that? 

One way it to use randomness. Let me try to explain by going back to
the example in last video.

SLIDE

The research study in the last video was about promotion decision in
banks. Under a male manager, is the a prejudice against women in
promotion decisions. Does gender actually matter, are fewer women
promoted. This was the data, and it produced a sample statistic: men
were promoted at at rate of 87.5% and women at a rate of 58.3%. The
difference was 29.2%, or 0.292 as a proportion. 

So here is the question: could this just have been random? This is a
sample statistic: it captures something about the parameter and the
whole population, but it's only a tiny pieces. Maybe this variable is
just random change. Maybe this sample happen to have more men
promoted, but another sample is just as likely to have more women
promoted. 

SLIDE

This gets back to the hypotheses. The null hypothesis says there is no
relationship in the parameter, in the whole population. A sample can
still be different, since a sample is a small piece of the population. 

If I want to reject the null hypothesis, it I want to argue that the
alternative hypothesis holds water, I need to say that the sample
reflects the parameter, that it is representative. That it is
significant. That is means something. How do I do that?

I do that by arguing that the sample statistics is unlikely to be true
under the null hypothesis. I get into probability. This course is not
going to do much probability theory, but that is a big part of
statistics. For now, I need to know the probability, under the null
hypothesis, of producing my sample statistic. If that probability is
small, it is evidence against the null hypothesis. 

SLIDE

So I need to study probability. This can be done with formal
mathematics which, as I said, is a large piece of the discipline of
statistics. But it can also be done very well by simulation. This is
the brute-force approach, and what we will do today. Let me explain in
the example.

Of the 48 cases in the study, 35 were promoted and 13 not promoted. Of
the promotion applicats, 24 were men and 24 were women. In the sample
statistics, 21 men were promoted and 14 women (adding to 35). How
likely is that breakdown to happen randomly? We'll let me find out by
doing a bunch of random selections. I'll randomly assign the
promotions to the applicatns. Take these 35 promotions and randomly
split them up between the men and the women.

SLIDE

Here's what that looks like. There are 35 promotions, and I asked a
random number generator to randomly assign them to the two categories.
These were the first few random trials. You can see that, in each row,
the two number sum to 35. I always assign 35 promotions, but the
gender breakdown is random. I've also calculated the proportions and
the difference, which is the third column. 

This is ten random trials. I even generated the same 14 and 21 as the
sample, though gender-switched. I also happened to generate a
situation, randomlly, where all 24 women were promoted. 

Doing this ten times in interesting. But doing this many, many times
gives a pretty good idea of probability. As I said, this is the brute
force method, but it is actually pretty reliable. If I want to no the
probability of something, if I can simluate it and run the simulation
thousands or millions of times, I get very, very good ideas of the
probabilities.

SLIDE

So, I run many, many random trials. Then I look at my sample
statistic: a 0.292 different in the proportion of men and women
promoted. Then I ask, how often does this happen? How often do at
least 29.% more men get promoted than women if the promotions were
split up randomly?

The answer, after all the random trials, is about 2%. This is called
the p-value of the sample statistics. It measure how likely it is that
the statistic is the result of random change in a varried population. 

So, from the sample statistic and the mathematical of random trials, I
can say that there is a 2% change that the null hypothesis is true,
that there is no relationship in the population as a whole, and that
this sample statistics is just random chance. 

Alright, what do I think about this 2%? It certainly could happen. 2%
change things to happen -- indeed, they happen one time in 50. So is
it possible. But it is unlikely.

Evaluation of statistics is all about what is likely. We approach
truth by probability and approximation. Statistics doesn't conclude
that a claim is true or false; it concludes that a claim is likely or
unlike. As such, it always involves a judgement call, yet again.

In a statistical analysis, we get to set a significance level. This is
usually written with the greek letter alpha. It is a measure of what
we consider very unlikely. 

Then, if the p value of a sample statisic is below alpha, the we
consider the sample statistics to be very unlikely to be caused by
random variance.

The most common choice, by far, for alpha is 0.05. This means that
situation which are less that 5% likely due to random change are
considered significant. In this study, the p value is 0.02, which is
indeed less thatn 0.05. So, by that standard, this sample statistic is
considered statistically significant. 

As statistically significant, it is justification for the study to
reject the null hypothesis, and argue that the alternative hypothesis
must hold. According to these conventions, this study does provide
real evidence of a prejudice among bank manager to promote fewer
women. 

This is judgement. The 5% singificance is a convention. If a higher
standard of justification is needed, this can be dropped, maybe to 1%
or a fraction of a percent. It's about probability, likeliness.

But this is how hypothesis testing works. A sample statistic is
generated from a sample. Some math or random trials are done to figure
out the probability of the sample statistic being just random, just
noise. If that probability is low enough, if it is very unlikely that
the sample statistic is just random change, then it is called
statistcally significant, the null hypothesis is rejected, and the
study gives real evidence for the alternative hypothesis. 

This video may be the very heart of this course. Statistical
significant is the real story behind so much of statistics. What is
likely to be true, what is likely to be random, what is likely to be
noise, and how do we measure all of this. That's what it is all about. 
