We're moving on to another method of statistical inference: the
confidence interval. This video will define the term and give a
calculation approach by simulation, much like we did for p-value.

SLIDE

To compare, let me review what we defined for hypothesis testing. A
hypothesis is a statement that something is going on with the
statistic, something other than a null hypothesis. The example we did
in the last video was an explanatory variable having an effect on a
dependent variable. The null hypothesis says there is no affect, but
we can test to reject the null hypothesis and say there is an effect. 

We didn't do an example, but the hypothesis can be any other kind of
statement about a population parameter. It might not be a variable
dependence: it might just be that the value of a population parameter
is above or below some threshold.

How did we test a hypothesis? Through simulation. If the null
hypothesis is true, we can generate random samples. If we do this
enough time, we get a sense of how likely our sample is. If our sample
is very unlikely, the we have justification to reject the null
hypothesis. 

Now what are confidence intervals? Well, instead of a yes/no question,
this is about a range of value. A confidence interval measure the size
of the effect of an explanatory variable on a dependent variable or
the range for a population parameter. Instead of a yes/no
null/alternative hypothesis, we want to use our sample to say
something about the range of values in the whole population. It's not
about statistical significane -- that's a hypothesis term. It's about
where we think the population might be only using our sample.

How do we figure out a confidence interval? Like hypothesis testing,
we use probability again. And again, we can do this mathematically
with probability theory, or by simulation. We'll stick with simulation
for now. 

SLIDE

Here is an example to try to explain what is going on with confidence
intervals. There is a strange game you can play with two people where
one person taps out the rhythm of a well-known song, and the other
tries to guess the song only by the rhythm. This turns out to be
harder than most people thing. A certain study did this with 120 pairs
of people. Only 3 of the 120 pairs has someone actually guess the
sone. This is our sample statisitc: 2.5 success rate. The sample
statistic is just a percentage, unlike the percentage difference in
the previous video. 

This is all we have to go on, just this study. What is likely true
about the general population -- how often would someone actually guess
the correct song? This is the population parameter. It's almost
certainly no exactly 2.5% -- that would be strange and uncanny. But we
can give it a range. 

Using only this study, only this information, what range would we be
confidence in for the population parameter? Our study produces 2.5%.
Maybe the rang is 0 to 5%? Maybe only 2 to 3%? Maybe 0 to 10? Where
can we have confidence about the population parameter just based on
our study?

SLIDE

How do we do this process? The simulation method here is called
bootstrapping, and it works this way. Very strangely, we assume that
the sample statistics is the population parameter. But then, using
that population parameter, we re-draw samples of the same size. Then
we calculate the probability of a range of values around our sample
parameter, using probability theory or simulation. It is an odd
process, but it does produce a range around the sample parameter.

SLIDE

Here is the graph when I did this for our song-guessing game. I
assumed that the population parameter was 2.5%: 2.5% of pair would
guess correctly. Then I asked a computer for random selections of 120
pairs from a very large population. I did this 1000 time, and this is
the histogram of those samples. 

From this, I make a confidence interval. Which confidence interval
depends on the range of confidence. 95% is common, so I take the part
of this histogram that includes 95% of the data. Such a range would be
0 to 0.07. It excludes these three bars, which take up less than 5% of
the data. (If I look at the data more carefully, I can get a finer
number than just 0.06, but this is enough for now). Using this
probability simulation, 95% of the sample are between 0 and 6%. This
is my 95% confidence interval. 

Other percentages could be taken. The 99% confidence interval would be
about 0 to 0.08. A 90% confidence would be about 0.1 to 0.5. And do
on. 

Let me recap. The point is this: knowing our sample, what can we say
about the population parameter? We can't say exactly, but we can say a
range. If our sample is without hidden bias or confounding factors,
then is means that we can be 95% sure that the population parameter is
between 0 and 6%. That's the point: our sample gives us a range for
the whole population. 

