We've done two videos about inferential statistics: hypothesis testing
and confidence intervals. Both were trying to use a sample to say
something, probabilistically, about the general population. We
approached these by randomization simulations. However, as I said,
there is a great wealth of probability theory in mathematics that can
just provide the required probability numbers for us instead of having
to run these simluation. I want to move in that direction. This video
is the first step: talking about the normal distribution and z-scores.

SLIDE

Let me start with the the term distribution. This words is going to do
a lot of heavy lifting in this section, so it is important to make
sure it is very clear. A distribution is the shape or arrangement of
some data. We first talked about this with histograms: one numeric
variable in a dataset, but into bins and displayed with counts for
each bin. This gave a visualization of the data, a shape. A
distribution. This was the data used in lo6 about interest rates,
showing a unimodal distribution with a right tail. 

SLIDE

We've already mentioned, in passing, the shape of a normal
distribution. This is the bell curve: a unimodel symmetric
distribution. This histogram shows a roughly normal distribution
shape. In this video, I want to really understand the normal
distribution, mathematically, so that we can use it going forward. 

SLIDE

In mathematics, the normal distribution is a function. The probability
theory of the normal distribution is all about understanding this
function. For now, I just want you to recognize it: it is an
exponential function with this special number "e" as its base. The
exponent has a -x^2 with some constants involves, and there is also a
constant in front, which always has a denominator involving the square
root of pi. It's a very strange expression, but it turns out to give
exactly this shape if you graph the function. It is the bell curve. 

SLIDE

The normal distribution is entirely determing by two things: its mean
and its standard deviation. The mean is at the top of the bell, and is
represented by the greek letter mu. The standard deviation is a
measure of how wide the bell curve is, and it is represented by the
greek letter sigma. These mu and sigma give the constants in the
function: mu in this numerator, and sigma squared in these two
denominators. Knowing both these numbers entirely determines the
function. 

SLIDE

This means that there are many normal distributions with various means
and standard deviations. Here are three. This tall one has mean of 0
and a standard deviation of 1 (which disappears in the function). This
second distribution has a mean of 4 and a standard deviation of 3,
more spread out than the previous. Finally, this has a mean of -3 and
a standard deviation of 5: even more spread out. The point here is
just that the mean and standard deviation entirely describe a normal
distribution.

SLIDE

Alright, that's the normal distribution. Let me move on to z-scores.
For normal distributions, a z-score is a way of measuring where one
particular data point falls in relation to the distribution. It is
calculated this way: the data point value, x, minus the mean, divided
by the standard deviation. 

SLIDE

That's the calculation, but what does it mean? Here is a normal
distribution with mean 15 and standard deviation 6. Let me look at the
value of z(18). This calculates to 0.5. The data point 18 has a
z-score of 0.5. Notice that the standard deviation is 6, but the data
point is exactly 3 units away from the mean. This is not coincidence.
A z-score counts how many standard deviations a data point is away
from the mean, with positive above the mean and negative below the
mean. It's a very convenient measure of how far out a data point is
with respect to a normal distribution. Since almost all of the data
for a normal distribution is within 3 standard deviations, typical
values of z-scores range from -3 to 3 (only very extreme outliers
would need larger z-scores). 

SLIDE

Let me now connect this to another definition from a previous videos:
percentiles. For a data point in a distribution, its percentile is the
percentage of how many other data points are below it. Here is the
same normal distribution, with 18 having a z-score of 0.5. There is a
way to go from z-scores to percentile. For our purposes, that way will
just be from a table (which is included on the Moodle page for your
reference). The table says that z=0.5 gives a percentile of 0.691 or
69.1 percent. That means that 69.1 percent of the data is below this
and 30.9 percent of the data is above this. Finally, there is one last
lovely interpretation here: the area under the curve. This area is
exactly 69.1% of the total area under the curve, and this area is
exactly 30.1%. Geometrically, the area to the left of any data point
is its percentile, which is pretty great. 

SLIDE

That's what we are going to need so far for z-scores, to setup the
class activity. But I'm not entirely done this video yet. There is one
more important topic to cover today. Let me go back to the idea of
distributions. This was the sample distribution I showed earlier. It
is the shape of one variable from one sample.

SLIDE

SLIDE

Now go back to LO11, where we did a simulation for hypothesis testing.
Assuming the null hypothesis, we generated difference in heights
between men and women by generating random samples. Each difference
here, then, is the difference from a unique sample. Ten samples, ten
differences. 

SLIDE

These differences are also numeric data, so I can make a histograph
here. There are ten samples: 2 in the first bar, 2 in the second, 2 in
the fourth and 4 in the last. This is also a distribution, but
a different kind. This is a sampling distribution: each count is one
randomly generated sample and the distribution shows what happens over
many different samples. This is what we used for hypothesis testing. 

SLIDE

So I have several different distribution running around. A statistical
study starts with a population parameter it wants to investigate.
Let's say that parameter is a proportion or difference in proportions.
There is a distribution for the whole population: the population
distribution. But this is unknown, since we can't measure the
population. Instead, we take a sample and get a sample statistics,
which is like the parameter. In this case, a proportion or difference
in proportion. 

Then I have just defined the sampling distribution. This is the
distribution of the statistics for many different samples, either
measured or, like in LO11, randomly generated. The sampling
distribution was what we used to generate the p-value, even though we
didn't call it that. 

This is getting hectic, so let me be very careful. A sampling
distirbution is not a display of the cases in one sample. Instead,
each sample generates a statistcs: one number for the sample. That
produces a new kind of dataset, with one value for each sample. The
shape of this data is the sampling distribution. 

SLIDE

This lets me state the big mathematical idea that pulls together both
parts of this video. This is a fundamentally important result which
makes much of the probability theory work. Say we are measuring a
statistic which is a proportion or a difference in proportions. Assume
that the observations in the samples are independent: that is, each
measurement doesn't affect all the other meausrements. This will
usually be true for well-designed studies, but it needs to be stated.
The, also assume that the sample size is large enough (with large
enough to be worked out later). Then, if I generate many, many samples
and calculate the statistic for each, I will get a roughly normal
distribution. 

This is sort-of crazy. The population doesn't have to be normally
distributed at all. I have no idea what the population data actually
looks like. But if I take many samples and take the statistic from
each sample and graph that data, under these assumptions, I always
get a normal distribution. 

This is a real mind-twister, and if your head is spinning right now,
that's alright. The real take away here is that this result, which is
called the Central Limit Theorem, is going to justify the use of the
normal distribution for the next few videos. It's the big mathematical
truth that makes it all work. 

