Now back to hypothesis tesing. Previously, we used a random simulation
to produce a p-value. This works, but there are more efficient ways.
Now, I'm going to draw on some mathematical probability theory to
produce a direct way to test a hypothesis. 

These techniques tend to different depending on the type of
statistics. We'll start with techinques that work for a statistic
which is a difference of proportions. 

SLIDE

Let's review what is going on in a difference of proportion. I'm going
to make this a very specific situation. There are two categorical
variables, one dependent and one explanatory. Each has only two
categories. 

The two cateogries in the explanatory variable are two different
group, and the study is really about the two groups. They might be two
parts of a populion: men and women, cat and dogs, spruce trees and
pine trees whatever. The are very often test and control groups. In
any case, the point is to determine a difference between the groups.

Then there are two outcomes in the dependent variable. Again, these
can be any kinds of pairs: happy or sad, tall or short, healty or
infected, and so on. 

The question is always this: do the two groups have different
outcomes. This is measured in percentages: if the percentage of one
outome versus the other different between the groups. The statistic is
the meausre of this percentage.

I've already mentioned it, but this is ths standard setup for a
controlled trial, one of the most common and most reliable
experimental designs. Two group: one that is neutral and one that is
effected. Two outcomes. Determine if the effected gooup has a
differene outcome to the control group. A difference in proportions of
outcomes. 

SLIDE

We'll use an example to demonstrate this. The example is a psychology
study. (This is a bit old, since it is about buying physical media,
but work with me here.) 

The subject we presented with a scenario. There is a DVD of a film
that they want to see, and they can purchase is right now for a
discounted price of $15. (Again, assume this is old enough that
physical media is the only way to get a copy of this film.) They are
asked if they would make the purchase.

But the psychologists are interested in something called oppotunity
cost: buying this DVD means that these subject have $15 less for
something else. So, they split the subject up into two groups, a
control group and a treatment group. 

They asked the control group a simple question: buy the DVD or don't
buy the DVD. But they asked the treatment group a different version,
where the second option also included "and keep the $15 for other
purchase". They wanted to know if this reminder, if making the
oppotunity cost explicit, would change the behaviours.

They ran this on 150 subjects, 75 control and 75 treatment. This is a
controlled trial, so a difference in proportions. What percentage of
the control group chose "buy", what percentage of the treatment group
chose" buy" and what is the difference in those two percentages?

SLIDE

Here is the data, presented as a contingency table. More subjects in
the control group bought the video, and more in the treatment group,
when remindered about the oppotunity cost, decline to buy. 

SLIDE

Here is a standardized bar plot to demonstrate that difference.

SLIDE

The sample statistic is the difference in the proportions, treatment
minus control.  (Recall that the hat here indicates something from the
sample, not the whole population.) The numbers from the table are
here, and 34 of the treatment group chose not to buy while 19 of the
control group chose not to buy. The difference is 0.200. The null
hypothesis says that there is no actual difference in the population
and the sample difference is just random noise. The alternative
hypothesis says that this reminder of opportunity cost will actually
have a general affect in the whole population, and that effect will be
to lower the rate of purchase, to this difference is positive. 

SLIDE

Previous, we did simulations to determine the p-value of the sample
statistic. We could have done the same thing here: assume the null
hypothesis, generate random samples of 150 subjects, shuffle the data,
and make a histogram. This is an example of what such a histogram
might have looked like. Our sample statistic is way out at 0.2, past
all most all of the data. Past, in fact, 99.4% of the data, so that
the p value is 0.6%. This would almost certainly show significance. 

But I don't want to have to simulations all the time. Last video, I
mentioned the Central Limit Theorem. It applies here and, under good
experimental design, it should apply to all differences of
proportions. What did is say. Well, it applies to sample
distributions: data sets where each data point was a statistics for
some randomaly generated sample. That's exactly what we have here: the
count on the axis is how many randomly generated samples that a
certain difference in proportions. Then what did the Central Limit
Theorem say? It said that as the number of random samples grows, this
distribution becomes more and more like a normal distributions.

SLIDE

So I'll use that. Instead of simulating a bunch of samples, if I know
from the mathematics that the distributon of samples will eventually
just be normal, why don't I go directly to that. I won't do any
simulation: I'll just let the math tell me that if I did many, many
simulations, then I'd get this normal distribution. I've drawn the
bell curve through here as well, just to show the standard normal
distribution shape. 

Then I can again, put the sample statistics 0.02 onto this graph and
ask how likely it is. It seems pretty unlikely.

But if I do this mathematically, it would be nice have a direct way to
calculate this. But this is a normal distribution -- from the last
videos, I have z-scores!

SLIDE

Here was the calculation of the z-score from last video: the unique
data point x minus the mean divided by the standard deviation. I want
the sample distribution from the null hypothesis, which says that the
difference is zero, so the normal distribution will be centred at this
zero. The mean will be zero. I also need to know how to calculation
the standard deviation, which I'll get to in a minute; for now, that
number is 0.078. then the z-score of my sample statitics is 2.56: it
is 2.56 standard deviations away from the mean. 

Also from last video, z-score gave me percentiles. These are from a
table. If I look up 2.56 on the table, I get the 99.48% percentile.
This sample statistic is greater than 99.48% of the randomly generated
samples. 

But then what is the p-value? It's how unlike the sample statistics is
to be generate from the null hypothesis. If this sample statistic is
above 99.48 percent of the distribution, then there is only a 0.52
percent chance of generating this value or greater. The p-value is
just one minus the percentile. Here, that's 0. 0052. If our threshold
of significance is 0.05, then this is much less, so the result is
certainly statistically significant. 

That's it -- that's the idea. The central limit says that the sampling
distribution is normal. That means I can calculate a z-score for my
sample statistics, which I can change into a percentile, which I can
change into a p-value. 

SLIDE

Well, what about that standard deviation sigma? I just pulled that
number out of thin air on the last slide, but where did it come from?
Again, probability theory and some heavy mathematics has figured out
how to calculate this. Here is the theory, stated quite generally. 

I'm measuring a difference in proportions for two categories in the
explanatory variable, category 1 and category 2. The sample statistics
is this difference. Each category has a count, its sample sizes. Here
are those numbers. The central limit theorem, again under certain
conditions, says that the sampling distribution will be normal. It's
standard deviation is calculated by this strange equation.  

Lastly, the standard deviation in this particular context (that is,
for a sampling distribution) is also called the standard error.
Multiple terms is annoying and confusing, but we are stuck with them.
This is sometimes written SE instead of the more general sigma.

SLIDE

Alright, that's the theory. Let's calculate for the example. Here is
the contingency table again for our two categorical variables. I'll
start with the numbers n_1 and n_2. These are the sample sizes for the
individual categories. Here, these are both 75.

SLIDE

Then I need the proportions p_1 and p_2. However, here I have to be
careful. I don't want the difference in proportion from this sample. I
am trying to understand the sampling distribution produced by the null
hypothesis, since that's how hypothesis testing works. The null
hypothesis says that there is no difference in proportions between the
two groups. So I have to look at the totals here. In these totals
there are 150 cases and 53 of them declined to buy the DVD. This what
I want to measure. So p_1 and p_2 will both be 0.35. Since this is the
proportion of the total, this is often called the pooled proportion.
For the hypothesis, both proportions should be set to the pooled
proportion. 

The mathematical theory here is more general and more powerful that we
need. It will give the standard deviations for any hypothesis that
sets a specific value for p_1 and p_2. Only by remembing that I want
the sampling distribution for the null hypothesis do I get the correct
use of the formula. 

SLIDE

Finally, here is that calculation. By the null hypothesis, both
proportions are the pooled proportion, which is 0.35. Both categories
have 75 subjects, so both n_1 and n_2 are 75. The result works out to
0.078, which is the number I used previous to calcluate the z-score.

SLIDE

Let me recap, since there are many steps to this process. 

You start with a sample statistic which is a difference in
proportions. 

Then you calculate the pooled proportion, which is the proportion of
the totals across the two categories of the explanatory variable. 

Then you calculate the standard error using the pooled proportion for
both proportions, and use the sample sizes for the two groups in the
explanatory variable.

Then you calculate the z-score of the sample statistics, using a mean
of zero and the standard error which you just calculated.

Then you take your z-score to a table to get the percentile.

Then you subtract your percentile from 1 to get a p-value. 

Finally, you use your standard of significance with this p-value to
determine whether you can rejecdt the null hypothesis. 

Lots of steps, for sure, and lots of vocabulary. But hopefully this is
doable, and it is certainly a lot easier than programming and running
large simulations each time. 
