The previous video used the normal distribution for hypothesis
testing. Now we want to do something similar for confidence intervals.
Again, these techniques tend to be specific to the type of statistic,
so this will still be about a difference in proportions.

SLIDE

I'll use the same data as last time. Here are the details: recall this
was a psychology experiment about two ways of asking a purchasing
questions. This is a control trial: there is a control group and a
treatment group, and each group has a percentage of buying and not
buying. 

SLIDE

Here was the data, which showed that more people in the treatment
group chose not to purchase. 

SLIDE

Here was the sample statistic: showing a difference of 20 percentage
points between the two proportions. The analysis in the last video
showed that the difference was statistically significant. Now we want
a confidence interval. What does that mean? It means that around this
20 percentage points difference, we want to know where the population
parameter here. That population parameter is stil a difference in
proportions, but it is unknown. We think this opportunity cost
reminder does affect people's decision making, but we don't know by
how much. The sample statistic gives us a starting point. We want to
now where the population parameter is likely to be. This is a range
around the sample statistic: a confidence range. It might be pretty
close: we might be 95% confident that the population parameter is
between 0.190 and 0.210. If might be very precise, between 0.199 and
0.201. If might be less precise, between 0.150 and 0.250. It might be
quite wide, between 0 and 0.4, including the possibility that there is
not diffrence at all.

A few videos ago, we used bootstrapping to make random samples, look
at the distribution of those new sample, and take the middle 95%
(excluding the top and bottomr 2.5%) to get the 95% confidence
interval (or similar for other percentages of confidence.) Now I want
to show you how to do this using the mathematics of probability
theory. 

SLIDE

First, let me remind you about the sampling distribution. Our random
process, both for the shuffles in hypothesis testing and the
bootstrapping in confidence intervals, involves making a bunch of
randomly generated samples. Then, from each randomly generated sample,
we calculate the relevant statistic: the difference of proportions.
That gives us a bunch of statistics. Then we treat all those
statistics as a new distribution: the sampling distribution. It shows
the possibilities of what the population parameter might be using all
these random samples. 

The central limit theorem (the key idea for this section) said that
under certain reasonable condition, the sampling distribution is
normal. This makes all the mathematic here work: we can work with a
normal distribution and its properties. 

SLIDE

So let me show you how to calculate the confidence interval. Say we
are aiming for 95% confidence. The sample distribution shows all the
random samples. I've labeled the x-axis here by standard deviations
away from the mean, out to -3 and 3. (Again, almost all of the normal
distribution falls within 3 standard deviations)

I want to know what is within 95% of the possibilities. Where is 95%
of the data? It's in this range, between these two bars. The excluded
tails are 2.5% of the data, and removing them gives 95% of data -- of
the sampling distribution.

The range, in terms of standard deviations, for 95% of the data is
approximately -1.96 standard deviations to 1.96 standard deviations.
(Like going from z-scores to percentiles, there is a complicated
function behind this, but we are not going to go into it. The ranges
for confidence will just be given to you, or we'll use R to calculate
them. 

SLIDE

So we have this range, in terms of standard deviations. To apply this,
I need the mean and standard deviation of some distribution.I want to
know what is within 95% of the possibilities. Where is 95% of the
data? It's in this range, between these two bars. The excluded tails
are 2.5% of the data, and removing them gives 95% of data -- of the
sampling distribution.

The range, in terms of standard deviations, for 95% of the data is
approximately -1.96 standard deviations to 1.96 standard deviations.
(Like going from z-scores to percentiles, there is a complicated
function behind this, but we are not going to go into it. The ranges
for confidence will just be given to you, or we'll use R to calculate
them. 

SLIDE

So we have this range, in terms of standard deviations. To apply this,
I need the mean and standard deviation of some distribution. Once I
have this, I can calculate the 95% confidence interval. It starts at
1.96 standard deviations below the mean, which is mu minus 1.96 times
sigma. Then it ends at 1.96 standard deviations above, which is mu
plut 1.96 times sigma. That's the process.

Let me apply this to the data for the psychology study. The mean of
the sample distribution is the sample statistics: 0.200. The standard
deviation, which for the sampling distribution is often called the
standard error, is 0.076. (We calculated this last video, so feel free
to review the process from that video.) 

Then I must apply this. I take 0.200 minus 1.96 times 0.076 gives
0.051, and likewise 0.200 plus 1.96 times 0.076 gives 0.349. This is
my 95% confidence interval for the population parameter. 

SLIDE

Let me recap. We have a sample statistic. That sample statistic
becomes the mean of the sampling distribution. The central limit
theorem says that the sampling distribution is normal (again, under
reasonable conditions). We calculate the standard deviation, also
called standard error, using the formula from the previous video.
Then, for each standard of confidence, there is a confidence interval
defined in terms of standard deviations. We use that, and the mean and
standard error, to calculate the confidence interval. No randomization
required: just the central limit theorem and the tools of mathematical
probability.

This distribution is what we would have produced if we did many, many
randomizations. It is reliable -- the probability theory says so,
definitively. This is what bootstrapping would have produced with
many, many randomizations. We can be 95% confident that, in the
population as a whole, the effect of reminding a buyer about the
oppotunity cost means an actual difference in purchase rates, and that
difference is between 5.1 and 34.9 percentage points. In particluar, 0
is not in that range, so we are 95% confident that there must be at
least some difference. This matches the previous video, which
concluded that the sample statistics was, indeed, statistically
significant and that the null hypothesis could be rejected. 
