We now have two methods of inferential statistics: hypothesis testing
and confidence intervals. We also have mathematical tools to calculate
them. We're going to step back and give some context by talking about
the potential errors in inferential statistics and how those inform
our approach.

SLIDE

In the context of hypothesis testing, there are two types of errors.
I'll use this chart to explain. The two hypotheses cover the two
potential truths: either the null hypothesis is true or the
alternative hypothesis is true. If the null hypothesis is true and we
fail to reject it (again, a nice double negative, but this is how we
talk about it), then we're correct. Nothing is going on, and our data
is not statistically significant, so we believe, indeed, that nothing
is going on.

If we reject the null hypothesis in favour of the alternative and the
alternative is true, then again, correct! There is some relationship
here and our statistics found evidence for it. Great. 

However, two other things can happy. The null hypothesis can be true,
but our analysis can still give evidence to reject it. This is called
a Type 1 error. Similarly, the alternative hypothesis might be true
but our particular sample is not strong enough to reject the null
hypotheses, thus we cannot give evidence for this truth. This is
called a Type 2 error. Similarly, I can call a Type 1 error a false
positive and a type 2 error a false negative. 

SLIDE

A common way to explain these errors is in terms of criminal trials.
The setup is similar. There is a null hypothesis, which is the default
position: the defendant is inoccent. Some strong evidence is needed to
overturn this and convict. If the defendant is actually innocent and found
innocent, great. If the defendant is actually guilty and found guilty,
great. If the defendant is wrongfully convicted, innocent but found
guilty, that is a type 1 error. If the defendant is guilty by found
innocent, that is a type 2 error. 

SLIDE

Why go through the bother of classifying these errors? Well, different
errors have different risks associated with them. When looking at a
research study, you can ask yourself where the major risks are.

Sometimes, the false positive is a major risk. If you are testing a
medication that has significant side effects, then having that
medication prescirbed when it doesn't actully work is a major risk:
all those dangerous side effects would happen with no justification or
benefit. The false positive is the greater risk, so you would want to
minimize type 1 errors. 

Sometimes, the false negative is a major risk. If you are testing a
food addative that might cause cancer, a false negative means that you
think there is no cancer risk where there is, in fact, a risk. You end
up approving the additive and causing a bunch of cancer cases --
obviously a very bad outcome. In this study, you would want to
minimize type 2 errors.

SLIDE

So how do we manage this? How can we design our statistics to favour a
certain kind of errors? In hypothesis testing, we do have one major
choice to make: the threshold of significance, which we called alpha
in previous videos. 

Alpha = 0.05 is a standard: a middle of the road threshold of
significant which is frequently used. 

What if we want to specifically avoid type 1 errors? Well, type 1 is a
false positive: we find something significant but, in truth, there
isn't actually a significant result to find. To avoid this, we have to
make significance harder to justify. So we lower alpha. Lower alpha
means that the p value has to be even lower, which is harder to
accomplish. More samples will be rejected, and we will have less
change of calling something significant when it actually isn't.

On the flip side, what if we want to avoid type 2 errors? Type 2 is a
false negative: we find no significance, but there actually is
something significant to find. To avoid this, we have to make
significance easier to justify. So we raise alpha. Higher alpha means
that more p-values are treated as significant, we accept more samples,
and we are less like to miss observing a real effect. 

Of course, we also make these choice not knowing whether there is an
effect or not. That's what the study is for, of course. But in setting
the significance threshold, we can determine which errors are riskiest
and should be more carefully avoided. 

SLIDE

That's setting significance. However, there is another subtle choice
that we've been making in hypothesis test, one that I've briefly
mentioned but not elaborated on. Let me do that now. Recall, for a
difference in proportion, this is what the null hypothesis looked
like. This is form of the alternative hypothesis we used, where we
expected a certain direction of the effect and assumed this difference
was greater than zero. (Equivalently, could have been less than zero).
However, I pointed out that this is restrictive: a more open
alternative hypothesis is that this difference is simply non-zero. We
aren't assuming the direction of the effect, just that there is an
effect.

There is a name for these hypothesis. The first here is called a
one-sided test, since it only conisiders what happens when the
difference is positive: one side of the mathematical possibilities.
The second is called a two-sided test. 

SLIDE

What difference does it make? Well, let's think about hypothesis
testing, either done mathematically or through actual randomization by
shuffling the data. The sampling distribution will be normal under
reasonable conditions according to the central limit theorem. Here is
a normal distribution, with the standard deviations marked on the x
axis. 

Say I am doing a one-sided test with a 0.05 threshold of significance.
Then, to call my sample statistic significant, it must be above 95% of
the data: it must fall in this one tail on the positive side. 

SLIDE

However, if I am doing a two-sided test, then the 95% is the middle of
the data, and I consider both tails. That 5% now becomes two tails,
each with 2.5% of the data. If the difference is, indeed, positive as
we expect, it now has to fall in this 2.5% on the positive side, not
just a 5% positive tail. 

The result is that it is more difficult to conclude statistical
significance, at least when our predication about the direction of the
effect is the same. 

SLIDE

Alright, let me sumarize again. I just argued that two-sided test make
significance more difficult. As before, making significance more
difficult lowers the chance of a false positive: a type 1 error.
Therefore, two-sided tests have fewer type one errors. An, in balance,
one-sided tests have fewer type one errors. 

It is generally considered good practice to default to two-sided
tests. It is always possible that the assumption about the direction
of an effect is wrong: we try to see if a medication is effect, but it
turns out to be counter-effective. We assume certain trees grow better in
wetter soils, but it might turn out that drier soils actually give
better outcomes. 

Based on this argument, a one-sided test should only be justified by a
very strong rationale that the effect must only occur on one side of
the data. Without a strong rationale like this, two-sided tests are
the preferred method. 

SLIDE

Finally, let me cover one last influence on error: sample size. In
general, larger samples sizes are very positive. They lead to more
precise statistics, smaller errors. You can see this very clearly with
the calculation for confidence intervals. If you recall from earlier
videos, the standard error for the sampling distribution was
calculated this way. The sample sizes are in the denominator here.
This means that larger sample sizes leads to smaller standard error,
which lead to smaller confidence intervals. Smaller confidence
intervals are more precise: we are confident that the actual
popuplation parameter is in a smaller range. In this way, increasing
the sample size leads to a more precise error. Something similar
happens in hypothesis testing.

So larger sample sizes are more precise, lead to smaller p-value and
smaller confidence intervals. All of this, in general, helps to reject
a null hypothesis. Therefore, larger sample sizes are particularly
helpful for avoiding type 2 errors: false negative. If you are worried
about type 2 errors, then large sample sizes are particularly helpful. 

Finally, this idea generalizes. The power of a statistical test is
define to be its ability to avoid type 2 errors. A powerful test will
more often reject the null hypothesis when the alternative hypothesis
is true. A large sample size in hypothesis testing produces a more
powerful teset. 

The idea of a powerful test in statistics ends up being pretty
complicated one. For now, you should think of a powerful test as one
that is good at finding positive results: if there is a truth in the
alternative hypothesis, if there is something going one between the
variables, then a powerful test is more likely to actually find it. 



