We're taking a break from the technical material for one class here to
talk about ethics in statistics.

SLIDE

Statistics is a pretty big business: many researchers, governments,
pundtics, pollers, advertisers, companies, all needs good statistical
information and are willing to pay statisticians to produce that
information. As a big business, its ethics are the subject of
considerable deliberation and debate. To give some context, I'll start
with some official sources. There is a Statistical Soceity of Canada
that published a Code of Ethical Statistical Practice. This is
intended to be a guide for its members, who are for the most part
professional statisticians. 

Determining ethics can never be done in a vacuum: ethics needs to be
motivated by some starting principles. This code starts with four
principles: statisticians have responsibility to society, to employers
or clients, to other practitioners. In addition to these specific
responsibility, a sense of professionalism motivates their ethics.

SLIDE

Statistics Canda is the statistical branch of the government. They are
responsible for many things, but perhaps most notably for the census
and the many statistical analaysis that can be derived from the
census. They also start from some principles, listed here. These are
a bit more specific than the previous list, and perhaps motivated by
its status as a government agency. 

SLIDE

The Tri-Council is Canada's natural research funding organization.
It's also government, but operates somewhat independently. It likewise
publishes ethical guidelines about how to use stat; these guidelines
matter a great deal since anyone who accepts Tri-Countil function
(including several King's professors) must abide by these rules. They
also have starting principles, listed here. These are again specific:
they are about how to conduct research, hence the focus on things like
consent (of human research subject), confidentiality (of research
information) and animal care (of animal research subjects). 

SLIDE

Let's spring-off from these Tri-Council guideline into some specifics
about ethical statistics. Tri council cared about confidentiality,
consent and animal care. That's all about gathering data, so what can
we say, in general, about the ethical guidelines for data? Well, here
are some questions.

What the data collected ethically? If human subjects were involved,
were they informed and did they consent? If animal were involved, were
they treated as well as reasonable, and if they suffered hardship (as
if often the case in medical research), was there justification for
that hardship in the value of the potential research outcomes? Was the
data stored carefully and confidentially?

Similarly, is their bias in the data? This gets back to the issue of
study design that we talked about early in the course. Bias is an
ethical issue in addition to producing questionable research. One of
the most well-known and documented bias in research is the sex bias in
historical medical research. For decades and decades, the male human
was simply assumed to be the default subject and males were use for
most medical trials. But it turns out that there are biological
differences between the sexes, and those difference present in a wide
variety of ways, including different symptoms for common ailments,
different reactions to medications, different physiological effects of
lifestyle choices, etcetera, etcetera. Much of medical science has been
correcting these biases for a long time know, but the work is still
ongoing. 

Other than bias, we've already talked about some other limitations of
data. Observatonal data and data without a control group both present
strong limitations to drawing statistical inference. 

All of this is about the data before any statistics is actually done.
You may have noticed in the Stats Canada slide, the guidelines were
for the broader term "data science", not just statistics. It all fits
together. Not asking the necessary questions about your data and how
it was produced is an ethical failing, even before any mathematics is
done at all. 

SLIDE

Then we get into doing mathematics itself. Mathematics unfortuantely
has the reputation of being neutral: just a set of tools. Hopefully,
in this course, you are realizing that judgment cannot be separated
from the use of mathematical tools: judgment is baked in. We're
already seen many instances of judgment:
- how do you decide which visualization to use?
- how to you determine a null hypothesis?
- what threshold of statistical significance do you use?
- what threshold of confidence do you use for a confidence interval?
- what level of correlation or R^2 value justifies a linear
  regression?
- which variables do you assume to be explanatory?

There is an even larger overarching judgment here. Stats has many
tools. You've seen a few, but only just a few among a whole jungle of
techniques. You can't use them all, you can't even use many of them,
you don't have time. So, what do you use? How do you decide what kind
of tests and visualizations to bring to some data? It's all judgment. 

SLIDE

There is something infact deeper going on here as well, which I feel
the need to point out. I'm a mathematician, and sometimes I get into
discussion about the ethics of mathematics. Very often, if someone is
asked the ethics of mathematics, the response is something like this:
well, mathematics is inert, just a set of tools. A tools doesn't have
ethics, but the use of tool has ethics. Mathematics in itself is
ethically blank, but whether you use mathematics for good or ill ends
determines its ethics. 

I want to argue here, in the context of stats, that this is a myth.
There is no such thing as a neutral tool, whether that is a hammer or
a hypothesis testing technique. 

I want to give you two reasons. First, when you have a tool are your
disposal, there is an inclination to use it. When all you have is a
hammer, you are liable to start hammering things regardless of whether
they ought to be hammered. Learning how to use a tool, particularly a
sophisticated tool like statistics, required hard work and
persistance. Having put in hard work and persistance, humans really
like to see value coming out of their hard work. They want to use
their tools. This is why, if you teach someone sophisticated
management techniques in an MBA, they will go out into a company and
use them. If you teach someone how to patch clothing, they will go
looking through their wardrobe for clothes to patch. If you teach
someone debate and public speaking techniques, they'll bring them out
at the next Christmas dinner with their extended family. People want
to use what they have learned. And, on the flip side, people can't use
what they don't know. So learning a tool is, to some level, always
creating a bias to use that tool, regardless of whether it is
appropriate. 
 
That's the first point, but let me go even further. Not only is there
a tendency to want to use what we know, but there is a deeper effect
on how situations are framed. In short, having a set of solution
techinques informs out imagination of what the world is about.
Solutions techniques actually dictate what the problems are, even
before we get to how to solve them. If you are trained in carpentry,
you can walk around the world seeing the flaws in buildings and
furniture, seeing problems everywhere that can be solved by carpentry.
If you are trained in business managements, you can end up seeing
every social situation through lense of effective people management.
If you are in clinical psychology, you can start seeing neuroses and
other psychological flaws in all the people you interact with. Tools
end up defining the problem. 

For the most complicated human situation, like those in politics or
other large human systems, everything is at place: the psychology of
the people, the sociology of their interactions, their individual and
collective histories, their financial realities, their social
hierarchies, the physical spaces they move in, their medical
histories, their diets and exercise regimes, the composition of the
air and soil around them, all of this. How do you solve complex
problems? Well, defining the problem is often the hardest part, and
people define problems by the tools they know.

This applies to statistics as well. Stats is the science of getting
meaning out of data, and it is very good at doing that if used well.
But not every human situation is a collection of data. If stats is
your lense for seeing the world, then every problem becomes a
statistical problem, to the detrement of those situations which are
better suited as psychological problems, historical problems,
narrative problems, ecological problem, medical problem, engineering
problems, financial problems, and so on. 

Lastly, all this fits into our worldview, our basic understanding of
who we are, what it means to be human, what our purpose is on this
planet. Statistics is glorious, but it can be immensely reductive.
Much of the world is data, but it is completely false to claim that
the world is nothing buy unanalyzed data. This is not a whole and full
want to understand the world. 

SLIDE

Let me finish with a short list of other potential ethical questions
about statistical practice. There are many, many ways to go with
ethical questions -- these are just a few more.

Often if there is a weakness in a study, it is obvious to a skill
statistician. Such a weakness should be disclosed, even if it means
that the results are somewhat less conclusive. This is obviously a
difficult thing to do: researchers want to state clear and confident
results. 

Good studies can be replicated, since replication is the most reliable
way to turn the indications of one study into reliable knowledge. If
the design of the study is such that it can never be repeated, then
it's value is limited.

Sometimes a research runs a study and ends up with a result other than
what they hoped for. Particularly when there is a public interest in
the knowledge (along with public funding for the research), the public
deserves to know the result even if the researcher disapproves of it
for some reason. The most on-the-nose example of this is, perhaps,
medical studies funded by pharmeceutical companies. Say a company
wants to see if one of their medications is effective in a new
situation.  They run a study, and the study shows that their treament
is, in fact, counter-effective: it made the medical outcomes worse.
That's useful information for the public to know, so there is an
ethical argument that the research should be reported. But, obviously,
there is a financial insentive against, since any negative press about
a medication can mean lower sales for the company. 

Communication of statistical information is fraught with ethical
concerns. We've already talked about this, but to recap briefly, there
are huge numbers of ways of display data. Each way emphasized
something and hides something. Which do you choose? Are you misleading
the public if your choices?

The confidentiality of data is another major ethical issue. Particular
for human data, there is a strong requirement to keep information
about individual subject confidential, for very obvious reasons.
However, there is also a strong public good to make as much data as
possible publically available. (The data-set used in this course are
good examples: they are dataset created by researchers which have been
made publically available and usable, particularly here for
educational purposes). So there is a tension here, which must be tread
carefully. 

Finally, you can always ask a simple question about any statistical
result: who benefits. Someone benefiting does not, of course,
necessarily mean the study is ethically subspect, but it should
inspire some amount of healthy skepticism. If an oil company runs a
study that shows the impacts of oil extraction on the ecosystem are
less severe than previously though, I'm going to be cautious about the
study, reserving judgment until, perhaps, it is replicated without any
industry funding. At the same time, is an alternative energy company
runs a study showing how amazingly productive and non-invasize their
wind farms are, I should show them the same skepticism, even if it
might be the case that I am already inclined towards the development
of renewable energy industries. 

This is a lot, and this is just the surface. Whole courses could be
taken, of course, on statistical ethics. But hopefully this is enough
to get you thinking. 
