So far, with hypothesis testing and confidence intervals we've focused
on a difference in proportions. This was a good place to start, since
a controlled trial is always a difference in proportions and a
controlled trial is one of the most fundamental ways to design a
research study. But there are other types of statistics. We are now
moving on to just a single proportion instead of a difference between
two proportions. 

SLIDE

So what kind of statistic is this? Well, it is a proportion, a
percentage, but only one. We are asking about the value of a single
percentage observation. It is still a categorical variable with two
options. It's like a trial but without a control group: there is only
the treatment group. 

Instead of comparing the two groups, it's just about the one group:
what percentage of the group falls into the two categories. Regardless
of the two categories, they are generally interpreted as success and
failure, and we will use that languagine throughout.

What kind of questions are we asking then? We're asking these
questions:

- How many canadians suppor the green party? There is only one group:
  Canadians. There are two categories: support or do not support.
  There is one percentage: what percentage support?

- How often do we have snow in Septmeber in Edmonton? There is one
  categories: years. There are two outcomes: snow or now snow. There
  is one percentage: how many years have snow sometime in September.

- How many restaurants in Edmonton have gluten-free options clearly
  available on their menus? There is one group: restaurants in
  Edmonton. There are two categories: glute free optiosn clearly
  available, or not clearly available. There is one percetange: how
  many restaurants have this?

SLIDE

Here is an example. A survey of payday loan borrowers asked 826 people
is they supported better regulation on payday loan lenders. 578
responded yes, which is 70%. Our sample statistics is 70%. The
question for a single proportion is always a threshold question. Here,
say we want to know if the population parameter (that is, the
percentage of all possible payday loan borrowers who would answer yes)
is at least 65%. That's a threshold. We can do hypothesis testing or
build a confidence interval to understand this threshold and answer
the question with some standard of confidence.

SLIDE

The threshold question gives a hypothesis: is the population
parameter above 65%? Our sample statistics is just one proprotion:
70% or 0.70. The null hypothesis answers no: the population parameter
is 65%. This is a bit different from before, when the null hypothesis
was a more definitive negative: there is not difference between
treatment and control groups. Here, we set a baseline or threshold. In
this case, the threshold we are interesting in, for whatever reason,
is this 65% threshold.

The alternative hypothesis says that the population parameter is
indeed above 65%. I'm doing a one-sided test here, since the reasearch
question is specifically interested whether this number exceeds 0.65.
The other side is not of interest, so a one-sided test is appropriate. 

SLIDE

So we have our hypothesis question and our sample statistics. The
quesiton is the same as before: how unlikely is our sample statistics
to be a random outcome of the null hypothesis? If likely, then it is
not significant and we do not have evidence for the alternative
hypothesis. If unlikely, then we is significant, we reject the null
hypothesis and accept the alternative. 

The setup for this is the same as before: we do randomizations and
study probability to figure this out. I'll leave the randomization
methods aside for now, but we still get a sampling distribution. Under
reasonable conditions, the central limit theorem applies and the
sampling distribution will be normal. The mean of the sampling
distribution will be given by the null hypothesis: in this case, a
mean of 0.65. Our sample statistics is 0.7. We want to know how far
out this is in the sampling distribution: now unlikely this is. 

SLIDE

So we need, again, to understand the sampling distribution. We already
have the mean, since that is given by the null hypothesis. We need the
standard deviation in order to figure out how many standard deviations
away we find our sample statistic, so we can use z-scores and
percentiles to calculate its probability. 

SLIDE

For a difference in proprtions, this was the formula for standard
error, the standard deviation of the sampling distribution. This has
two proprotions and two sample sizes. However, now we only have one
group. Happily for us, having one group just simplifies the standard
error. The formula is just one half of this express, with only one
porportion to worry about. We don't have any pooled proportion
question anymore either, since there aren't two groups to pool
together. 

SLIDE

Let me put the whole calculation together. I have a sample statistics:
0.70. I have a null hypothesis which stipulates a mean of 0.65. I have
a standard error calculated by this square root expression, which has
the null hypothesis proportion and the sample size. I then have the
z-score of the sample statistics, which tells me that is is 2.94
standard deviations away from the mean. I can turn that into a
percentile, which is 0.998 or 99.8th percentile. I can make a p-value
by taking the difference from one, which gives me the probability that
0.7 (or above) was randomly produced by the null hypothesis. This
probability is 0.002, must less that 0.05, so the finding is
signficant. I reject the null hypothesis and conlude that, by the
evidence of this study, the population parameter is indeed above 65%. 

Let me make the same note I did before. In the standard error, the
sample size is in the denominator. That means that larger sample sizes
mean smaller standard error, which mean larger z score, and
percentiles closer to 1, and smaller p-value, and, finally, more
likely to find significant. Larger sample sizes are more likely to
produce significant results, mathematically, according to the
probability theory. 

SLIDE

That's hypothesis testing. I can do the same thing for confidence
intervals. The setup is very similar to what we did before, but let me
go over it. Under reasonable conditions, I can assume the sampling
distribution is normal as before. However, the sampling distributino
for confidence intervals is difference. I don't have a null hypothesis
anymore, I just have the sample statistic: 0.70. That is the mean of
the sample distribution here. The standard error is the same formula,
but now I am using the sample statistic as the mean, not another mean
from a null hypothesis. Here, the standard error works out to 0.016.
That's the standard deviation of this normal sampling distribution. 

Then the range of the 95% confidence interval was given by this
formula, which is still the same. I go out 1.96 standard deviations
from the mean on either side. The numbers here work out to 0.669 to
0.731. I am 95% confidence that the population parameter is between
66.9& and 73.1%. This also matches the hypothesis test: I am 95%
certain that the population parameter is above 0.65, since I am 95%
certain that is lies in this range which does not include 0.65. 

The number 1.96 is for the 95% confidence intervals. Other confidence
intervals have other coefficients here, which I mentioned before. To
change your standard of confidence, you just replace this 1.96 with
the appropriate coefficient. 
