We are moving on to another kind of statistic to test today. For both
difference in proportions and single proprotions, I said there must be
only two categories in the categorical variable: one treated as
success and one treated as failure. Now I want to allow for more than
two categories and see what happens to hypothesis testing. This is
going to lead to yet more probability theory and more techniques.

SLIDE

In one of the early class activities, we looked at data about where
lizards were found. There were two categorical variables, but each
had three categories. This needs a new technique: there isn't just
success and failure here, or yes and no. There are multiple options. 

In the context of hypothesis, this contingency table is often called a
two-way table. Apologies for the multiple terminology, but it is
conventional. 

SLIDE

Again, I'll use an example for this video. This is a study about
consumer inquiry and purchasing confidence. If you are purchasing
something, particular outside of a formal store (i.e. someplace like
Facebook Marketplace), how can you figure out if the item being sold
is in good condition? In particular, does the particular way in which
you ask your questions made a difference?

A study was setup were 219 participants were asked to sell a used iPod
which they knew had frozen twice in the past. The buyers got to keep
some of the sale price, so they were motivated to recover decent value
selling the iPod. (Forgive, again, the dated study. I know iPod died
as a thing years ago, but this was a study from a good while back.
Work with me here!)

Unbeknownst to the sellers, the buyers were also part of the study.
They were instruced to ask questions to determine the condition of the
iPod. They were told to randomly choose between these three questions
- What can you tell me about it?
- It doesn't have any problems, does it?
- What problems does it have?

The idea here, psychologically, is that the first question seem
neutral, the second has an implicitly positive assumption that there
aren't problems, and the third has an implicitly negative assumption,
that there are problems. Do these assumptions, built into the
question, have an effect on the responses?

SLIDE

Here is the data. Each of the questions was asked exactly 73 times.
Only twice in the neutral question lead to disclose of the potential
freezing problems. The positive assumption led to 23 disclosures and
the negative assumption led to 36 disclosure.

The research question here is this: does the form of the question make
a difference? But there are three options, not just two. How do we do
the stats to answer this question? We now want to know not just was
there a difference, but what difference is due to which type of
questions.

SLIDE

I want to do hypothesis testing, so I'm going to need some baseline
information in order to setup my null hypothesis. Let me first look at
how many disclosures there were in total. I add up the disclosers and
divide by the number of case, and I get a general disclosure rat e of
27.8%. Mutliplying by 73, this means that if all is equal, there
should be about 20 disclosures in each of the three groups of 73
cases. Similarly, I could calculate that there should be about 53
non-disclosure in each group of 73. 

The null hypothesis is that the questions make no difference at all,
that in the whole population, roughly 22 out of 73 people would
disclose and the difference between these groups in this sample is
just random. Again, I want to use probability theory to ask how like
the sample is under this null hypothesis. 

SLIDE

So I have a baseline of 22.33 disclosures and 52.67 non-disclosures. I
now want to compare that baseline to what actually happened in each
situation. I have three categories and two outcomes: six situations.
For all of the six, I use this formula to measure the difference
between the sample outcome and the baseline I just established. I take
the difference, square it, and divide by the baseline proportion. Why
this way? Again, it comes from the probability theory and
mathematically is it a reliable way to measure how much the sample
differs from the baseline, from the null hypothesis. (This method also
always produces positive values, which is nice since all the
difference then add up instead of cancelling out). 

Then I add up all these six numbers. This gives me one value, which is
a measure of the total variation in the sample from the expectation of
the null hypothesis. This sum is called a chi-squared test statistics.
This is something like a new version of a z-score: it's a
probabilistic measure of how unlikely this sample is compared to a
certain null hypothesis. (This is called chi-squared because this x is
actually not an x: it's the uppercase version of the greek letter chi.
It just happens to look like an x. Sorry for the confusion, but, again
for whatever conventional reason, chi is the symbol chosen here. You
just have to remember that this is not an x, it's a capital chi. Also,
chi is the usual pronunciation in statistics, even though the greek is
something close to chi(greek pronunciation).) 

So what do we do with it? How do we use the chi-squared to answer the
hypothesis testing question?

SLIDE

As before, we can do a randomization process. In this case, the null
hypothesis is that all categories are equally likely. To emulate that,
we can just shuffle the data: take the 61 discloe and the 18 hide and
then just re-destribute them among the groups. Then, each of these
instances would have its own chi-squared value and I could calculate
those, one by one. This would give me a distribution, and then I could
compare that dsitribution with the sample statistic, to see how likely
it is. This is the same randomization process I used previously, just
with more categories to shuffle between.

SLIDE

Here is a histogram of a bunch of randomizations of this data and
their chi-squared scores. This is assuming the null hypothesis: that
there is no difference between groups. Chi-square = 0 would recover
this perfect balance, but that hardly ever happens. Instead, almost
all of the sample have some variables, but most have a low
chi-squraed. The random samples are groups near 0 and they decay away.
Our sample statistics had a chi-squared of 40, which is way, way out
compared to these randomizations. Like, this means that something
significant is happening: these randomizations don't seem to have any
chance at all of producing a chi-squared of 40. 

SLIDE

That would be doing the randomizations by hand. I don't want to do
that. I want to make use of the fact that many clever mathematicians
have build probability models so that I can just calculate directly.
Happily, this is true, but the models are now different. This is no
longer a normal distribution at all. The previous histogram didn't
look normal at all: it started with lots of data and then decayed away
only in the positive direction. There were no negative at all (indeed,
chi-squared is always a positive number).

The theory here, then, it not based on normal distributions. It is
based on another set of mathematical functions, unsurprisingly called
chi-squared distributions. The normal distributions difference by mean
and standard deviations. For chi-squared, there is one parameter --
degrees of freedom. Here are the graphs for for 1 to 8 degrees of
freedom. They all start tall near zero and then decay away in the
positive direction. They don't exist at all below zero. 

Like with normal distributions, understanding these mathematical
functions allows us to do the hypothesis test directly, without having
to do the randomizations ourselves. 

The central limit theorem said that the sampling distribution is
normal under certain reasonable conditions. The same is true here:
there are conditions for the data to fit these distributions. I'm not
going to get into the details of those conditions -- a well designed
study with good data should satisfy, but you should be aware that
these conditions do exist. 

SLIDE

I showed you pretty graphs of several chi-squared distribution. Which
one to use? Well, it's depends on the degree of freedom. So what is
the degree of freedom of a data set? Well, the situation here is
categorical variables with multiple categories. The number of
categories is this degree of freedom. Specifically, take the two
cateogrical variables we have here. Take the number of categories in
the first varible, subtract one, then multiply by the number of
categories in the second variable, again subtrating one.

In our cases, there were three categories of questions, so the first
piece here is 3-1, and two categories of outcome, so 2-1 in the
second. The degree of freedom we need for this particular chi-squared
process is 2. 
