In the previous video we started to talk about drawing conclusions
from data. The `scope of inference' refers to the same thing: what we
can infer from the data. We're going to do a lot of mathematics in
this course to analyse data, but even before the mathematics happens,
we have to think about how the data was collected, how the study was
designed, and all the various human component of data. 

SLIDE

So we get back to vocabulary. Let's define some more terms, using this
example. Say I am interesting in how much mercury is found in Atlantic
swordfish. In a perfect world, I'd had the opportunity, time and
resources to examine every last swordfish in the ocean. The group is
called the population. Population is a technical word in statistics
and it refers to the entirety of the subject of the study. 

Since examing the population writ large is impossible, a study will
instead try to examine a portion of the population. This is called a
sample; again, sample is now a technical term in statistics. It always
means a piece of a population. The size of the same, how many fish,
will be an important part of the design of the research and the
ensuing statistical analysis. 

SLIDE

An yet more vocabulary! I have population and statistics and I can
measure data about either. If I am able to make a full measurement of
the entire population, that is called a parameter. Usually, this is
impossible, but it is still very useful to talk about the parameter,
the unknowable value of some measurement for the entire population.

So, instead, I measure a sample, a piece of the population. This
measure is called a statistics -- here we are, the definition of the
name of the discipline. Statistics are measurements of samples. 

SLIDE

Research wants to discover something truth, something real, or at
least something that is likely to be truth or real. If we can't study
a whole population, and we almost always can't, we study a sample. We
measure statistics. What we want are representative statistics: the
statistics should be close to the parameter. What we observe of a piece
of the population should be close to the whole population. This is a
good statistics. The whole rest of this course will be about figuring
out what is a good statistics and how to measure it.

But for now, a good statistics needs a good same, a representative
sample. The rest of this video will talk about sampling risks and
biases. 

SLIDE

Statistics is always about collections of cases. Many other things
effect samples, but it is almost always true that the larger a sample,
the more likely it is to be representative. More cases lead to better
statistics.

The opposite is also true: fewer cases lead to worse statistics. The
extreme version of this is anecdotal evidence: using a single case or
a small number of notable cases to make an argument. 

Anecdotal evidence is very appealing and is widely used in human
conversation. And for conversation, that's neither here or there. But
as a way of producing reliable conclusions, it's a major risk. A good
statistician needs training to resist the allure of one really good
story and fall back to larger samples and good methods. It's not
nearly as exciting, but much more likely to produce something close to
the truth. 

In addition to vocabulary and calculation, I hope this course builds
habits of thinking. When you hear a remarkable story, I hope there is
a little circuit in your brain that thinks: well, maybe this is just
an exceptional case. If a certain government changes its tax rate
(either up or down) and job losses follow, the political temptation is
to generalize: obviously these new taxes (lower taxes or higher taxes,
whichever it is) are bad for the economoy. I hope, after this course,
there is a little piece of your mind that will always think: well,
maybe this is an unusually case, an outlier, something in the sample
that is not representative. 

SLIDE

Now let me talk about sampling.  There are many ways to get good or
poor sample.  If I look at a piece of the population, what piece is
it? We want it to be representative -- that is, to capture what is
typical about the population. A great deal of work in experimental
design revolves around finding a good, representative sample.

Naive samples are unlikely to be representative. If I have these 32
cases in my data set, I can select the first 10, but there is a good
change such a sample will have a bias. 

Instead, I'll choose a random 10 cases.  A random sample is just at it
says: selected a random subset of the population. By some method, I
this random subset and then hope that it is representative. 

SLIDE

Random samples are used to reduce the risk of a biased sample. A
biased sample has some criterion, either explicit or hidden, that make
the sample less likely to be representative.

- If you want to study attitudes of kings students but only ask arts
  majors, you are unlikely to capture the breadth of the student body.
  This is a biased sample.
- If you want to study lifespan of coyotes in Alberta but only
  measure coyotes in Elk Island Park, you are unlike to capture the
  variety in the population. This is a biased sample. 
- If you want to study the spending habits of Canadians but only
  survey white men, you are missing the majority of the population and
  are unlikely to capture the breadth of the data. This is a biased
  sample. 

Producing an unbiased sample is often very difficult: there are many
potential sources of bias, some obvious but some very difficult to
discover. A hidden source of bias is often called a confounding
factor or confounding variable. A good statistician, a good
experimental designer is always looking at data gathering methods and
wondering about potential bias and confounding factors in the method.

There is much more to be said about random samples, and I encourage
you to read the matching section of the text for some more
information.

SLIDE

The process of planning and experiment and choosing methods of
gathering data is called experimental design. Good experimental design
tries very hard to avoid bias in sampling. Experimental design is a
whole discipline itself and this course will only scratch the surface,
but let me say a little about it and define some terms which will
shope up later in the course.

When possible, a good study is controlled. A controlled study is a
study like what we discussed in the previous video, where an
experiment is applied to one group and a second group, the control
group, is measured to provide a reference point. Both groups need to
be selected to avoid sampling bias. 

A good study has good randomization. I've already talked about random
sampling, so I am repeating myself here. There may be hidden biases in
the sample -- confounding variables. A good study looks for these and
tries to be aware of their potential. 

A good study is replicated. A replicated study is simply a repetition
of the study with new samples. Replication is another check again
bias: if several studies can repeat the same conclusion, then the
potential for bias affecting the conclusion is mitigated. Of course,
this doesn't solve everything, since it is always possible a hidden
bias, a confounding factors, was equally affecting all repetitions of
the study. 

SLIDE

Let me summarize. Since studying whole is almost always
impossible, researchers study samples. The measure information about
those samples, which are called statistics. 

Experimental design is the process of collecting data. Good design
produces good samples and hence good statistics. Good experimenters
look for sources of hidden bias -- the confounding variables. This is
all in the services of producing a result that has a good probability
of being reliable. 
