We move on to yet another kind of statistics: a single mean. How do we
test this? How to we build a confidence intervals?

SLIDE

So what is this kind of statistics? Let me recap the kinds of
statistics we've seen so far in hypothesis testing and confidence
intervals. A difference in proportion is exemplified by a controlled
trial. An alternative hypothesis would be that vaccines can prevent
polio. There are two proportions: the infected proportion of the
control group and the infected proportion of the control group. The
sample statistics is the difference in proportions. The null
hypothesis is that there is no difference in the population, but the
alternative hypothesis says there is a difference. 

Then we moved on to single proportions. Still a categorical variable,
but no longer a treatment/control comparison. The alternative
hypothesis is usually a threshold: at least 30% of the lodgepole pine
trees in BC have been infected by the mountain pine beetle. The null
hypothesis is no longer zero, but just the negation of the threshold. 

These were both for categorical variables. Now we want to do
statistics for numeric variables. For numeric variables, we measure
means: averages. The alternative hypothesis will again be a threshold,
but now a threshold of a mean, not a proportion. The average length of
an adult female blue whale is at least 20 metres. The null hypothesis
is again the negation of this. 

This is the kind of statistics I want to study now. The approach will
be similar: hypothesis testing and confidence intervals. Find a
distribution, figure our means and standard deviations, use those to
construct z-scores, percentiles, p-values and confidence intervals.

SLIDE

Though the approach is similar, working with numerical data is
different. This is a bit more complicated than proportions. It's not
just yes or no, success or failure. Instead, numeric variables take a
whole range of values. 

That means what the population itself looks like is a whole
distribution, not just a single percentage. We're trying to figure
something out about a pretty complicated situation. The population
distribution is, like the population parameter, the actual situation
in the population. We have no idea what this looks like: it could be
some strange kind of distribution, with peaks and valleys, patterns,
whatever. There is no guarantee that it is a normal distribution, or
any other kind as well. 

So how do we investigate it? We'll, we use the tools we have for
distributions. For now, I'll stick to two: mean and standard
deviations. All distributions (not just normal distributions) have
means and standard deviations. We'd like to use the sample to
determine something about the population mean and the population
standard deviation, with some confidence or by testing some
hypothesis. This is what we are trying to do.

Do be careful, now. This is a population distribution: it's how that
actual unknown entire population looks for a certain variable. We'll
be look at a sample and then looking at randomization as before. This
will create sampling distributions. It's important to keep the
difference in mind: there is a population distribution and a sampling
distribution, and they are not at all the same.

SLIDE

Again, I'll use an example to set this up. We'll talk about the length
of adult female blue whales. Say we managed to measure 20 such whales
in the wild, and we got this data. This is our data set. We want to
figure out what we can say about the general female blue whale
population based on this data.

SLIDE

We're going to need a sample statistics. There are, in fact, two: the
mean and the standard deviation. I've calculated them here: the sample
mean is 23.385, which I will write as x-bar for the rest of this
video. The sample standard deviation is 2.116. (Note that this is
always standard deviation, not standard error. The term standard error
is only used for sampling distributions, not for population
distributions.) 

From this point, for either hypothesis testing or for confidence
intervals, I could proceed by bootstrapping to make a sampling
distribution for either the mean or the standard deviation. Then I
could compare my sample statistics with the distribution to determine
a p-value or a confidence interval. As before, we're not going to do
the randomization anymore, and instead use probability theory to
supply us with the distributions and the process for calculating
p-values and confidence intervals.

SLIDE

So the mathematical theory will give us the distributions. For
previous sampling distributions, I applied the central limit theorem
to say that, if I did enough bootstrapping or data-shuffling, my
sampling distribution will be normal, so I can just use the property
of the normal distribution. The same applies here: if you do enough
bootstrapping randomizations, then the sampling distribution will be
normal. But again, there are conditions.

I didn't talk that much about the conditions before, but I want to
here, since they are potentially more common. What I need to avoid are
samples with significant outliers. If the sample size is small, than
any significant outliers can cause the central limit theorem to fail.
If the sample is large, then the system is more robust and only very
extreme outliers are a problem. 

In my example, the sample is small: only 20 whales. The data points
19.3 and 26.7 were the bottom and top of the range, but the didn't
seem too separated from the rest of the data. Maybe they are
significant outliers, maybe not. But maybe I'm a little bit worried.
What do I do if I am worried about the application of the central
limit theorem?

SLIDE

Well, there is a solution: another kind of distribution. The
t-distribution is quite similar to a normal distribution, but with a
couple important difference. The red curve here is anormal
distribution. These others are t-distributions. Look specifically at
the blue curve: compared with the normal distribution, this has must
larger tails. This is what a t-distribution does: it models something
like a normal distribution, but allows more substantial outliers in
these larger tails. 

Like the chi-squared distribution from last vidoes, t-distributions
are have a parameter called degrees of freedom. The blue curve here is
the t-distribution with 1 degree of freedom. The green is with 2, the
orange is with 5. The red curve is actually the t-distribution for 100
degrees of freedom: as the degrees of freedom increase, the
t-distribution becomes more and more like the normal distribution.

Therefore, this is useful particular for smaller sample sizes, like
the 20 whales in this example. For large sample sizes, t-distribution
and normal distributions are nearly identical and the statistical
method will produce almost exactly the same p-value and confidence
intervals.

Once I've chosen a t-distribution, the setup is still the same. I want
to talk about means and standard error, percentiles and p-values. I
want to figure out if a sample statistic is within 95% of the data or
not. I want to determine the middle 95% of this for a confidence
intervals.

SLIDE

So what is the mathematics to do this? As before, the probability
theorists have studied the t-distribution and produced calculation
techniques for us. Let me guide you through them. First, for
hypothesis testing an p-values. 

I have a sample statistic for the mean: 23.385. I have the null
hypothesis, that the population mean is 21 metres or less. I have the
alternative hypothesis that the population mean is more than 21
meters. 

I'm going to need the standard error again. Unlike the square root
expressions, the standard error is easier to calculation here: it is
the standard deviation of the sample, sigma divided by the square root
of the sample size. 

For a normal distribution, one I knew the standard error, I calculated
a z-score for my sample statistic: that was a measure of how far out
the sample statistic was in the sampling distribution: eventually, how
unlikley it is under the null hypothesis. Here, for t-distributions,
there is something similar. It is called a T-score. It is defined in
basically the same way: the sample mean minus the mean dictated by the
null hypothesis divided by the sample error. 

For normal distributions, if I have a z-score, I calculated its
percentile and used that percentile to generate a p-value (either as
the percentile or as one minus the percentile, depending on which side
of the distribution I am one. Here, there is a calculation that goes
directly from the t-score to the p-value. Historically, this was done
with t-tables. We'll just use R. I asked R and it gave me a p-value of
0.000367. Obviously, smaller than 0.05, so by the usual threshold of
significance, this is a significant result. I conclude that this
sample gives evidence that the mean length of an adult female blue
whale is over 21 metres: the null hypothesis is rejected and the
alternative hypothesis is supported. 

To recap, this is the process: calculate the sample mean. State the
null hypothesis, with the threshold value you want for this mean.
Calculate the degrees of freedom (which R will need from you at
several points). Calculate the standard error. Calculate the T-score.
Finally, use the t-score and the degrees of freedom to get a p-value. 

SLIDE

When we did hypothesis testing with normal distributions, we had to
worry about one and two sided tests. The same is true here. In the
example about blue whales, I only did a one-sided test. However,
two-sided tests are also possible. The process is the same as before:
if I want to make a one-sided test into a two-sided test, I just
double the p-value. Visually, I'm, looking at both sides of the
distibution, so the likeliness of being somewhere in one of the two
tails doubles. The unlikely range is now only 2.5% of each side, not
5% of one tail. 

SLIDE

Finally, let me talk about confidence intervals. I have the same
starting information: the sample statistics, the degrees of freedom
and the standard error. The setup for confidence intervals, as before,
is an interval that starts below the sample mean and end above it. The
distance out is some number times the standard error. For 95% for a
normal distribution, this number was 1.96. That number comes from the
probability theory. Again, historically you look this up on a table
and we let R calculate it. 

The same it true here: all t-distributions, for various degrees of
freedom, have these numbers that determine various confidence
intervals. I didn't defined these number last time, but they are
called point estimates. The point estimate for 19 degrees of freedom
and 95% confidence is 2.09: again, I asked R to calculate this form.

Therefore, the confidence interval is the mean minus 2.09 times the
standard error to the mean plut 2.09 times the standard error. In this
case, it works out to 22.396 to 24.374.

What does this mean? It means based on this sample (and, as always,
assuming the study doesn't have any bias or confounding variables) I
am 95% confidend that the mean length of adult female blue whales
across the entire population is between 22.396 and 24.374. 


