We're moving on, again, to another kind of statistic. We've done a
difference of proportions, a single proportion, a single mean. Now we
have a difference of means. 

SLIDE

Here is the setup. We have one numeric variable, the thing that we are
measuring and studying. We have a categorical variable with two
groups. This can be treatment and control, like with difference of
proportion, or it can just be two comparison groups. 

It is important for the propability theory here that the groups are
independent. This means there is no causal connection: something that
happens in one group doesn't affect cases in the other group.

For an example, a question about smoking or non-smoking mother and
birthweight has two independent groups: the smoking mothers and
non-smoking mothers. They don't affect each other. The means are
independent.

In constrat, a study could measure blood pressure before and after
medication. There would still be two groups, the before group and the
after group, one for each case. But there is a causal relationship:
each before and after come from a single human being. This is not
independent.

SLIDE

Here is data from the births14 data set, which we have used in class
several times already. There were many variable in that dataset, but I
have isolated the binary categorical variable smoker or nonsmoker.
I've given the number of cases, the mean birthweight and the standard
deviation of the birthweight in each group. This is the right
situation: two independent means. 

Obviously, there is a difference here. The question, as always, is
whether this difference is statistically significant. Does it provide
evidence for an actual different in the population. 

I state this as a hypothesis test. The null hypothesis is that there
is no difference. I'm writing mu_n and mu_s for the two means: average
for non-smokers and average for non-smokers The null hypothesis says
that these are the same. The alternative hypothesis says that these
are difference. In this form, I am doing a two-sided test, which I
will remember later. 

SLIDE

The general setup for hypothesis testing is the same as always. We
want to know how likely it is that our sample statistic was produced
under the null hypothesis. To do this, we make a sampling
distribution: a set of statistics produced randomly assumine the null
hypothesis. From this , we get a z-score for our sample statistic, and
a p-value, which measure how unlikely our sample statistic is.
Originally, we got the sampling distribution by a randomization
process, but for a while now, we've let the mathematics of probability
theory give us the sampling distribution.

We do the same here, but we need to worry about conditions. First, as
mentioned before, we need independence in the two groups. We have that
here, all good.

As with last video for a single mean, we also have to worry about the
outliers in the dataset. The sample size here is quite large, so we
only need to worry about extreme outliers. I've not shown it here, but
if you look at the data set, there some outliers, but nothing extreme.
The mathematics should work here.

SLIDE

Alright, then, the sampling distribution. The central limit theorem
tells us that the sampling distribution should be normal. However,
like with a single mean, there is good reason in the theory to use the
t-distribution instead: the wider distribution with heavier tails
better suits these numerical variables. So I need the details of the
t-distribution.

First, the mean of the sampling distribution. I am doing a difference
of means and the null hypothesis is that the difference is zero.
The sampling distribution is under the assumption of the null
hypothesis, which says there is no difference between the means. 

Second, the standard error: the standard deviation of the sampling
distribution. This is given by the probability theory: here is the
formula, where sigma is the standard deviation of each category and n
is the sample size of each category. 

Then, I need the degrees of freedom parameter. Remember that
t-distributions have a parameter, called degrees freedom. In the
previous two situation (chi-squared for multiple categories and
hypothesis testing for a single mean), there was a fairly direct way
to calculate degrees of freedom. For a difference in means, the actual
formula is pretty complicated, and there is some subtle mathematics
that makes various adjustment. Therefore, we'll just let R calculate
the degrees of freedom. 

Then I calculate a T-score. This is the same as before: my sample
statistic minus the mean of the sampling distribution, which is zero,
divided by the standard error. 

Finally, I calculate the p-value from the T-score. As before, I'll do
this with R (though historically this would be calculated from a table
of t-scores.) 

That's the process. It's pretty similar to previous processes. The
major differences here are the new standard error formula and the
strange, hidden method to calculate the degrees of freedom.

SLIDE

And now for confidence intervals. The process is pretty similar again
to previous processes. Unlike hypothesis testing, there is no null
hypothesis, so no zero mean for the sampling distribution. Instead,
the mean of the sampling distribution is the sample statistic.

The standard error calculation is the same as for hypothesis testing.
The degrees of freedom parameter is also the same, and again
calculated by R for us. 

The I need the coefficient for determining the confidence intervals.
This depends on which confidence range I want, and it depends on the
degrees of freedom. Again, I let R calculate this for me.

Once I have all this information then, as we've done several time
before, the confidence interval is from the mean minus the coefficient
times the standard error to the mean plus the coefficient times the
standard error. 

