The last videos was pretty conceptual. We want good statistics, good
samples, results that are realiable. Now let's get into some methods.
In this video, I introduce the first two tools to draw conclusions
from data, which is what the course is all about.

SLIDE

First, as usual, more vocabulary! The analysis of conclusions, of
statistics, can be broken down into two categories: descriptive and
inferential. This is tricky, since both are about getting information
from data. What is the difference, really, between a description and
an inference?

This is how it works, though the distinction is a little bit subtle.
Descriptive statistics are ways of describing, summarizing and
visualizing the data in a dataset. They help up make sense of what the
data is. They are relatively direct.

Inferential statistics are more ambitious. They start with a
hypothesis of a relationship between the variables in the data set.
This relationship is more than a description of the data, it's a
mathematical connection hidden inside the data. One this hypothesis is
put forward, it is tested with a variety of methods, to determine
whether the hypothesis holds. It's a much more active process than
summarizing or describing. 

For now, we want to use descriptive methods. I'm going to start with
categorical variables. 

SLIDE

Here's the data from the first video again. To reminder you, the data
measure whether or not patients had a stroke within two time periods,
separated into treatment and control groups. There are 451 patients in
this data sets. Just skimming through it we can try to get a sense of
how many had strokes and how many didn't, but that's not particularly
precise. Instead, we make tables to summarize. 

SLIDE

A frequency table is a table that gives the total count for each value
of a categorical variables. Remember that categorical variables were
variabls with some set number of categories, which could be anything
the researcher wants. This is just counting up how many of each
category shows up for this one variable. It's not fancy -- in many
ways, it's the first thing to do. However, having a term -- frequency
table -- to refer to this is still very useful. Even the
straightforward thinks like counting are well served by a definition. 
Note the total here: the total should always add up to the number of
cases, since each case has to fall into one of the categories. 

SLIDE

This count could also be presented as a percentage. The total is 451,
so 405/451 is 0.898 or 89.8 percent of 451. Likewise 46 calculates to
10.2 percent. The following is
still called a frequency table. Total count or percentage are two ways
of recording the frequency of each category in a categorical variable.
Again, the total should have 100 percent, to make sure all of the
cases are accounted for. This summary tells us that strokes occured in
roughly 10 percent of patients over this variable (which was the
30-day time period variable). 

A frequency table just recounts what happened with one fixed
variables. The study, however, wants to compare treatment and control
groups. 

SLIDE

This is a contingency table -- more vocabulary again. Stats exist and
move by its terminology. Taking this course seriously means working on
the terms, internalizing them.

A contingency table counts the frequency of each variable when another
variable is fixed. Here, the first colum is the categories of a
categorical variable: control and treatmet are the categories in the
variable group. Then, for each value of that variable, the other
variables are counted. 

It's a setup to do something pretty obvious: how many people in the
treatment group actually had a stroke? How many in the control group?
Very natural questions, the central questions of the research study.
We need a name for this table, as obvious as it is. It's called the
contingency table, since it records how other categorical variables
are contingent on some fixed categorical variable. 

The totals are included on the right and at the bottom: the right is
totals in the control and treatment categories and the bottom is totals in
the stroke and no event variables. Adding them all up gives up the
check on the bottom right, that we have accounted for all the
variable. 

SLIDE

As with a frequency table, we can convert these to percentages. This
is pretty valuable for interpretation, since the control and treament
groups might be of difference size. Raw numbers might not be the best
comparison, but percentages may be more honest. How are these
percentages calculated? They are a percentage of the total for each
category, to 5.7 percent is 13 divided by 227 and 14.7 percent is 33
divided by 224. That's the correct ratio: what percentage of this
group category fall under this 30-day stroke/no storke category. 

This is descriptive statistics. We are summarizing the data. 5.7\% of
the control group had a stroke within 30 day, and 14.7\% of the
treatment group. This study is looking poor for the efficay of
stents in helping prevent strokes. That's a reasonable conclusion from
this display of data. 

You might be frustrated by how we've turned something pretty obvious:
just compare the percentages, into a formal structure with a technical
name. This is an understandable frustration, and one that is really
common in statistics. The terms, calculations and structure can often
confuse and seem like they are getting in the way of the more
common-sense analysis. But they are necessary. We are going to build
on these terms and structure, and we are going to need a way to
clearly and precisely refer to them. So stick with it, work on the
vocabulary, and try to connect all the new terms and structure to the
pretty reasonable and straightforward logic underneath it all. Which
group had more strokes in the first 30 days? Surprisingly, perhaps,
the treatment group did, but a large margin in percentage. 
