The previous videos focused on tables as summaries of data. Tables are
good, but data communication can do much better. I want to turn data
into visualizations: pictures that express the data.

This is very powerful, since a visualization can be so much more
effective. However, it also always comes with risk. Visualization is
always a choice of how to display data, and, like so many things in
this course, that choice is always a judgement call. Every choice of
visualization emphasizes something about the data and hides something
else. There is no such thing as a neutral visualizations -- they are
always informed by a goal. 

SLIDE

In this video, I'm going to be talking about a data gathered by a bank
about home loan applications. There are ten thousand cases in this
data and three variables. One variable is the current home ownership
status of the application: whether they already own a home outright,
have a mortgage, or rent. Another variable is the applition type:
individual or joint. The final variable is the rating the bank gave to
the application, which is a letter from A to G with A being the safest
loan to aware and G being the most risky.

Here is a frequency table for the ownership variable, showing the
count of all three categories for this variable. It's not bad to get a
sense of the data from the table, but I want to visualize the data.

SLIDE

Therefore, I make a bar plot. In a bar plot, each category is
expressed as a vertical or horizontal bar, the length of which is the
value of the variable. This is the same data, but now I have a
qualitative sense of the relationship between the variable -- a sense
that might have been missing from the raw numbers. It's easy to see,
at a glance, the relative sizes of the categories. 

SLIDE

The previous bar graph was the total count, but I can also do a bar
graph with proportions. Here is the same data, but the vertical axis
is now proportion instead of count. These proportions have been lefts
as decimals (the count divided by the total), but I could have also
written these as 48%, 14% and 39%, if I whished. 

SLIDE

That was a frequency table in bar graph form. It captures the count or
proportion of one variables. But now let me do some interaction
between variables. A contingency table was introduced last video to
show how variables interact each other. Here, I want to see how the
ownership variable interacts with the application type: individual or
joint. Of the 4789 applications with a mortgage, 37977 were
individuals and 812 were joint applications. Again, the data is here,
but seeing what is all means in just the number is getting more
difficult. With bar plots, I'm going to show you three ways to express
this contingency table. 

SLIDE

Here is a stacked bar plot. This are the same bars as the first bar
plot I shoed you, but now I have used the second variable, the
application type, to colour the bars in two colours. In the mortgage
bar, the blue is individuals and the pink is joint applications.
Likewise for the other two bars. This still shows the ownership
variable in the height of the bar, but also gives a good visualization
of the breakdown of each bar by application type. It's easy to get a
rough sense of how many of each bar are individual or joint
applicant.s

SLIDE

A dodged bar shows the same information, but shows the breakdown
side-by-side instead in one bar. The total of the mortgage category is
now the sum of these two bars, and each subset is its own side-by-side
bar. This makes the total of each category, mortgage, onw and rent, a
little bit less visable, but it makes the comparison in each part
between individual and joint more clear. As I said before,
visualization is always about trade-offs: what you want to show, what
you are content with making less visible. If the comparison between
individuals and joint applicatants is the most important, this is a
good choice.

SLIDE

Finally, I can also do something similar with proportions. Here, but
total of the mortgage, own and rent categories is completely gone. All
that this plot tries to show is the relative percentages of individual
and joint applications inside each ownership category. What is shown
is that more mortgage carries have joint applications, and fewer
homeowners do. Again, the choice of plot is determined by what the
author of the visualization wishes to display or allows to be hidden.
Here, the relative values are entirely hidden. 

SLIDE

In addition to bar plots, another visualization I imagine you are
already familiar with is a pie chart. Pie charts are exclusively for
proportions: the pie of always consider as a whole and each section of
the pie is a portion of the whole. Here is the category data for the
ownership variable again, from the frequency table earlier. This is
just the one variable -- I'm not comparing variables as I did in the
previous three slide. This pie chart shows in a nice, clear way, how
many applicants have a mortgage, own a proprety, or rent a property.

SLIDE

Pie charts are often great for proportions -- they are seen as
intuitive and easy to read representations of parts of a whole.
However, they too can have their weaknesses. I haven't talked about
the third variable yet, but here is the data for the loan grades the
bank gave to all its applicants. Again, A is the safest loan to grant
and G is the most risky. This is pretty clear for the early letters,
but readinng this for E, F and G is not pleasant, even if I were to
take away the overlaping percentage text. Pie chart work well for
large percentages, but showing very small slices can be a problem.
Again, in addition to knowing terms for these visualization tools, the
main these of this video is that visualizations are also about choice:
choosing the right visualization for clarity and purpose, and
realizing that all visualizations necessarily involve tradeoffs. 



















