In the previous video, we talked about bar plots and pie charts to
visualize categorical variables, either alone or in relationship to
each other. Now we want to move on to visualization of numerical
variables. This video starts with scatterplots

SLIDE

A study collected data on a group of students, including how many
hours they spend studying per week over a term and their resulting GPA
in that term. These are both discrete numeric variables, assuming we
round to the nearest hour. 

There are two numeric variables. This works well on a plot with two
axes. We can treat each variable as an axis. Here, the horizontal axis
is the GPA variable and the vertical axis is the study variables.
Then, every case gives a value for each variable. These values are,
now, eseentially coordinates: an x and a y value. These are dot, which
I can put on the visualization.

I get this: each case is a dot and the cases together give all these
dots. A scatterplot is perhaps the most direct way to show two
potentially interacting numeric variable: all the data is here,
nothing about those two variables is hidden. 

Visualization is meant to show something about the data. What does
this scatterplot show? When we have two numeric variables, we can
wonder about the relationship between them. Is there a relationship
here? Maybe, but it's hard to tell. The data seems to fall into a
triangle, which might be evidence that more studying leads to higher
GPA. But is is pretty marginal. 

More importantly, though, this is the difference between description
and inferential statistics. A scatter plot is descriptive: it shows
the data. To hypothesize a relationship based on this is to make an
inference, which may or may not be true. We will return to the this
idea in great detail later in the course. 

SLIDE

Here is another scatter plot, this one about house prices and square
footage of sold houses in a certain city. Again, every dot is a case,
a house that was sold along with its area and its price. 

Here there seems to be better evidence for a relationship. Larger
houses certainly seem to correlate with higher prices. This would be a
positive corelation, if it held: higher values in one variable lead to
higher values in the other. A negative corelation would be the
oppotise: larger values in one variable lead to smaller in the other.
Again, whether there actually is a relationship here is something for
later in the course.

This scatter plot also demonstrates something else: an outlies.
Scatterplots show how the data is group. This data has a unique case
which is very far away from the others. This is an outlier. Dealing
with outliers is an important part of data analysis and, again,
something we will certainly return to. 

SLIDE

Here is another scatter plot, this one from a British study about
smoking. The two numeric variables are cigarettes smokes per day on a
weekend day and the age of the smoker. 

This scatter plot is really all over the place. Other than certain
responses (15, 20) being more common, this looks like a pretty random
spray of data, and it is very unlikely there is any relationship here
to be drawn between these two variables. 

SLIDE

Here is another scatter plot, from a study of US counties that
includes variables of median household income and poverty rate in
percentage. Again, each dot is a particular county and its value in
these two variables. There looks like there might be a relationship
here, a negative correlation since higher income leads to lower povery
rates, but perhaps not a straight line relationship.

SLIDE

This lets me introduce a new idea for numeric data, this is the second
big idea of this video. Instead of just visualizing data, we can also
do something to the data before visualizing or otherwise working with
it. What do I mean by do something? Well, I mean applying some
mathematical function. This is called transforming the data.

In principle, I can use any mathematical function on the data. I could
square root the dat, or calculation 2 to the power of the data. I
could apply a logarithm to the data. If I do this to all the cases, I
get a new, related variable, a transformed variable. There are many
places in statistic where these transformations are valuable and
important.

It turns out that the logarithm transformation is particular useful. I
have here the logarithm base ten, which I hope and expect you are
familiar with. However, there is another logarithm which is very often
used in both mathematics and statistics. There is a special number
written "e" with value approximation 2.718 and so on. Even though this
is a letter, it is just a number, a constant. Why this number is
special is a subject treated in calculus but a bit more than this
video has time for. But it is one of the most important number in
mathematics. 

The logarithm with base e has a special name: it is called the natural
logarithm. It is written l-n instead of log e. Transformation by the
natural logarithic is a very common transformation. 

Though this is not a mathematics class, there are piece of mathematics
that we will need to be comfortable with. The logarithm, and the
natural logarithm, are two of these. Please review logarithms if you
have any reservations about your memory of them. 

SLIDE

Now back to the income and povery scatter plot. Here is the same data,
but with the natural logarithm applied to both variables. I get a new
scatter plot. The previous one seemed to have a curved-line
relationship, but now this looks like their might be a straight line
negative correlation. Since working with straight line (and trying to
fine them) is much easier than curves, this transformation might turn
out to be wonderful. For now, it's enough to know that doing this
transformation is simply a thing that can be done. 
