In the previous video, I talked about scatterplots as a way to look at
the interaction between two numerical variables in a data set.  In
this video, I want to step back to looking at a single numerical
variable. In descriptive statistics we want to do both: we want to
understand the data of a single variable and also interactions between
variables. This video is about histograms and the distribution of a
single numerical variable.

SLIDE

In class, we've already make use of a dataset about home loans and
interest rates. I'm going to use that data set again. It had 50 cases,
and interest rate in percentage was one of its numeric variables. 

One way to understand numeric variables is to group them into
categories or ranges. All the percentages in the data set fall between
5 and 25 percent. I've grouped this into eight equal ranges: 5 to 7.5,
7.5 to 10, 10 to 12.5 and so on. Then I've counted how many cases fall
into each range and made a bar graph of that count. The result is a
histogram. It always consists of some division of the nuemric value
into ranges and bars indicating how many cases fall into each range.

A histogram gives a good picture of the distribution of a single
variable. When looking at a single variable, we want to understand
exactly this: the distribution of the data. What are the possible
values of this variable? How are those values spread out? What is a
typical value? These are the central questions of the analysis of one
numeric variable.

In this historgraph, it's clear that there are more cases in the lower
range than the higher range. That's already interesting information
about the data and how it behaves. 

As with all visualizations, of course, there is always judgement. For
a histogram, a major choice is the number of categories for the data.
The small details of a distribution can look fairly different if the
ranges chosen are altered.

SLIDE

I'm going to show a number of other histograms to introduce some more
terminology. All of this terminology is, again, for describing the
distribution of a single variable. The distribution can have a left
tail: a few values that are signifancly less than the main part of the
distribution. It looks like this on a historygram.

SLIDE

Similarly, a distribution can have a right til, with a few values
larger than the rest of the distribution. This is what a right tail
looks like. I've not show it, but of course a distribution can have
both tails as well. Tails say something about the edges of a
distribution, the unusual cases and how far they are away from what
might be considered usual or normal.

SLIDE

A distribution that involves a single peak and data that decreases on
either side of a peak is called a unimodal distribution. The most
common shape for a unimodel distribution is the bell curve shape. This
distribution is similar to a bell curve but far from identical.

The bell curve is called a normal distribution. The term is loaded, of
course, and much will be said in the class about the normal
distribution. Many kinds of data are normally distributed, but many
kinds of data are not. The assumption that data should be normally
distribution -- that the histogram should look like a bell curve -- is
a dangerous and often flawed assumption. 

SLIDE

So, let's talk about some other general shapes of distributions of
data -- data that has a different profile than the normal
distribution.

The normal distribution was unimodal -- one peak. A distribution can
have more than one peak -- if there are two peaks, with a area of
fewer cases between them, the data is called bimodal. 

As an example, this is a pretty common distribution for class grades
in university courses: I've seen a lot of bimodal classes in my
teaching years. 

SLIDE

A distribution can have even more than two peaks. A multimodal
distribution has several peaks with few cases between them. 

SLIDE

Sometimes, for one numerica variable in a dataset, there is a single
case (or maybe a small number of cases) which differ a lot from the
rest of the data. These are called outliers -- this histogram shows
all of the cases between 0 and 8, with one outlier in the 12-14 range. 

Dealing with outliers is an important part of statistics. Sometime
they represent errors, and many place in statistics will exclude
outliers. However, they can also represent special cases that have
some valuable explantion -- something that can add to the
understanding of the data. Outliers are something to be careful with
and aware of. 

SLIDE

Here is a population variable presented as a histogram. Some 200 cases
aer represented in this histogram, with all but 2 in the 0 - 2 million
range and two outliers with higher populations. For population, these
might be reasonable. If this is populations of cities, then maybe only
two cities in the data set were cities or 4 or 5 million, but the rest
were all cities between 0 and 2 million. I may not want to exclude the
outliers. 

In the previous video, I talked about transformation of data set:
applying a mathematical function to one or more variable, to all the
cases. Transforming the data set leads to different way of visualizing
the data. 

In a situation like this, where all the data is clustered in a small
part of a histogram, a logarithm transformation can help see more
detail. The logarithm decreases all values, but it has a much greater
effect on larger values.

SLIDE

Here is the same poluation after applying the logarithm. The two
outliers are still here, but the rest of the population is now spread
out over seven piece of the histogram, not just three. I get a better
sense of the data and its distribution after applying the logarithm.
This is one of the things that a transformation can do: lead to more
readable data.

In summary, the histograms in this video visualize the profile, the
distribution, of a single variable. They let us identify the shape of
the data, left and right tails, normal unimodal distributions, bimodel
or multimodal distribution, and other qualitative description of the
data. Just as a visualization is supposed to do. 

