The histograms of the last video introduced the idea of distribution
of a single variable. What is the shape of the data, how it is
grouped, where are its peaks and valleys? I want to continue this
theme by talking about central tendencies and spread. This is a bit
video -- central tendencies are one of the most important ideas in
statistics. Let's get started.

SLIDE

I'm going to work with the same Loans data set and interest rate
variable as before. Here is the histogram from last video. A central
tendency is any way of measuring what is usual or typical from a
single variable in a data set. There are many central tendencies, but
I'll start with the averge, which is usually called the mean in
statistics. 

SLIDE

An average of a numeric variable is found by adding up all the cases,
which I can label as x with subscripts. Then I divide by the number of
cases. x with a bar over it, read x-bar, is a common notation. 

We are going to ask R to do many of our calculations in this course.
But I want you to understand what R is doing for the most important
calculations. To understand a mean is to understand how it is
calculated, hence actually having some mathematics for you to process.
This notation might be quite new: variable with subscripts to count
them, bars over variable letters. I encourage you, for all the
mathematics in this course, to spend time with the definitions and try
to internalize them. 

For the Loans data, there are 50 cases. Adding up the interest rate in
percentage for all 50 and dividing by 50 gives a mean interest rate of
11.57 percent.

SLIDE

I can draw that 11.57 as a line on the histogram. That's the average,
which is one way of measuring what is a typical interest rate in this
data. 

Once I have a central tendency set, I have another important question:
how much does the data spread out from the central tendency? There are
two important words to define here: deviation and variance. Both
capture the idea of an individual case being different from the mean.
Visually, both relate to how the values, shown here group in a
histogram, spread out.

SLIDE

Let me get to the definitions. Deviation is a term that applies to a
single case (for a single numeric variable) and is the difference
between that case and the mean. The mean for the loans data was 11.57
percent. For each case, there is a percentage, and I can subtract the
mean. What I get is the deviation for each case: the first case
deviated by .67 below, the next by 1.65 below, the next by 14.73
above and so on. I can calculate a deviation for each of the 50 cases. 

SLIDE

Deviation is good for an individual case, but how do I summarize that
for the whole data set? The definition that statistics has come up
with for this is sample variable. It is found by squaring all the
deviations, adding them up, and dividing by the number of cases. It is
written s^2. 

Wait a second, I said dividing by the number of cases, but here I
wrote 50-1, dividing by one less. This is a strange thing in the
definition of sample variance called Bessel's correction. If you want
to hear more about the mathematical subtleties of this, ask me in
class. For now, just remember to divide by one less than the number of
cases. 

SLIDE

The sample variance is a meausre of the spread of data, but not the
most intuitive one. However, I can take the square root. The result is
s, which is called the standard deviation. It is something like the
average of the devitiations: it measures how far out the data
typically is from the mean. 

SLIDE

Here is the histogram again. I'll draw the mean of 11.75. The standard
deviation was about 5, so I can draw a region 5 units away from the
mean. 

Outside of very strange distribution, usually about two thirds of the
data point will fall within one standard deviation. This is not a
fixed rule, more a tendency or trend, but it is pretty reliable.
Likewise, almost all of most data sets will fall within two standard
deviations of the mean, but just a few cases remaining outside such a
range.

SLIDE

That was a discussion of mean or average, and the associated ideas of
devitions, sample variance, and standard deviation. But mean is not
the only central tendency: in fact, many exist. Mean is one of the two
most common, the other of that pair is the median.

The median of a numerical variable in a dataset is litterally the
middle value. Here are all 50 cases in the loans data, showing their
interest rate in percentage. I've put them in order by this variable.
Let me count halfway in: 25. I get here. Since there are an even
number of cases, I am between two elements. The median will be the sum
of these two divided by 2. They are both 9.93, so M works out to 9.93
here. If there were an odd number of cases, the median would just be
the middle number. 

This is also a central tendency. One of the strange things about
statistics is that multiple different things align with the normal
language sense of "usual" or "normal". Both the mean and the median
are some measure of what it typical in the sample. 

SLIDE

The mean came with devitations, sample variance, and standard
deviation as associated definitions. The median likewise has
associated definitions which can be used to describe the distribution
of the data. First, let me talk about quartiles. This is just a
slightly fancy word: it just means quarters of the data (in ascending
order). I can put this data into quarters. A quarter of 50 is 12 and a
half, to here are the distinctions.

Then, every data point is in one of the quartiles (with a couple being
exactly on the boundaries). When I say "the first quartile", I measure
this by the upper bound, in this case, 7.96. Likewise, the second
quartile is the upper bound of the second quarter, which is just the
median again. The third quartile is 14.08. These quartiles give a way
to break up the data into pieces, to understand it better.

Let me briefly also define the associated idea of percentiles.
Dividing into quarters was an arbitrary choise: I can divide into any
piece I wish. A percentile is a division determined by a percent. The
first quartiles if the 25th percentile. I could then ask for the 30th
percentile, the 40th, and so on. Each of these is just a percentage of
the ordered variable. You'll hear the phrase "in the 90th percentile"
in various places: this just means that the particular case exceeds 90
percent of the other cases. This popular use is slightly confusing
temrinology, but hopefully the idea of breaking an order data set into
pieces is still clear. 

SLIDE

I still have a few more definition here. After the medians and the
quartiles, I can define the inter-quartile ranges. This is simply the
third quartile minus the first. It defines the spread of the middle
half of the data: in this case, the middle half of the data all sits
within an interval of 6.12: from 7.96 percent to 14.08 percent. Like
the sample variance and the standard deviation from earlier, this is a
mesure of the spread of the data. A low IQR is a tight data set and a
high IQR is a spread out data set. 

Finally, let me calculate 1.5 times the IQR, and then add that to the
third quartile. This seems a bit arbitrary, but what this number is
telling me is a range that is well beyond the centre of the data. This
convention: adding 1.5 the IQR to the third quartile, is often used to
determine outliers on the top of the data. In this case, I get 23.26,
so I have some justification for treating the last two data point as
outliers. Something similar could be done for the bottom half of the
data, subtractking 1.5IQR from the first quartile. In this dataset,
there are no such outliers on the lower side: 5.31 is actually pretty
close to the mean, much closer than 26.30.

SLIDE

That was a lot of definition. There is a visualzation for all these
definitions, called a box plot. It start with a line at the median.
Then I make a box from the first quartile to the third. This box
contains hald the data, and the position of the median within this
half data shows something of how it is distributed. Here, the median
is less than halfway through the box, showing that the data is
clustered more tightly below the median. 

The box is half the data set. I then draw two more lines at the
extreme values of the data set: the lower and highest values. These
are called the whiskers of the box plot, and all of the data sits
between the whiskers. Again, I see a tighter cluser of data on the low
side, and a more spread out data set above. This is like showing a
right tail with a histogram, but using an entirely new visualization
tool. 

All the data? Well, not all the data. When I make the whiskers, I can
choose to ignore outliers. Remember on the last slide, using the
pattern of 1.5 times IQR above the third quartile, I excluded two
points. On the box plot, I can draw these as dots and only extend the
whisker to the third highest data point. This is, again, conventional.
Outliers are statistically interesting, so in this way, the box plot
can make their existence clear.

Finally, as with all visualizations, something is shown and something
is hidden. This box plot gives me a sense of the data: where the
median is, how the data is spread. The box is the middle half of the
data, so inside the box is some measure of usual data. Out to the
wiskers is the rest of the data, so I can see a bit of how it is
distrubted. I can show specific outliers. For a simple diagram, a lot
of information is shown.

This video talked about two hold systems. The first was the system
with means, deviations, sample variance and standard deviation. I drew
these over a histogram to show the shape of the data. The second
system was the system with medians, quartiles, inter-quartile ranges,
box plots, whisker and outliers. It gives another picture. 

Which one do I use? Well, this is the real heart of the matter. As you
have already seen and will continue to see, statistics has no shortage
of methods. There are many things you can do to display and analyze
data. Being a good statistician is knowing the various system well and
choosing a system for the goals as hand. 

That's pretty vague, so let me leave you with one criteria for
choosing between mean and median. A statistic or visualiztion is
called robust if changes to just a small number of data points don't
really change the statistic. This is often desirable. If I change only
one data point out of 200, probably the analysis should be almost the
same. 

The mean and associated sample variance and standard deviation are
useful and great for some tests and calculations, but they are not
necessarily robust. Outliers can have a great effect on the mean, and
moving an outlier further out will show up, even if it is only one
data point among many. In contrast, medians and the rest of the
information in a box plot is robust. If I move these two outliers even
further out, nothing else in the box plot will change. Box plots are
less sensitive to outliers, and often that is a desirable trait. We'll
talk more about these judgement calls in the future -- indeed, as you
should be aware of by now, such judgement calls are oen of the main
themes of the course. 
