We've spend a few videos on description statistics: visualizations of
data. Now we want to move on to the first piece of inferential
statistics, which is regression. This video will introduce the idea of
linear regression, with the goal being to understand the concept and,
in particular, the coefficients.

SLIDE

Here is a scatter plot of two numeric variables in a data set about
possums. The variables are the length of the whole animal (including
the long tail)in centimeters, and the length of just the head, in
milimeters. As usual, the dots are the cases, representing the
measurements of one specific possum. 

As before, a natural question in a scatter plot is this: is there a
relationship between the two numeric variables. In this scatter plot,
it looks like their might be a positive correlation. This also
intuitively makes some sense: the larger animals can be reasonably
expected to also have larger heads. 

What is this relationship? It's always hard to say, but statistics
tries to guess. And the first guess is the simplest relationship: a
linear relationship. This is a relationship repesented by a straight
line. 

SLIDE

So let me briefly review lines. A couple videos ago, I mentioned that
logarithms were an important piece of mathematical background that was
work reviewing. Equations of lines are another such piece. The
standard form is this, called the slope-intercept form. I hope that
this is at least a little familiar. x and y are the coordinates, of
course. The line is described by two numbers, m, the slope, and b, the
y-intercept. The y-intercept is the less important for today's
interpretation, though it certainly carries meaning. You can think of
it as where the relationship stats. When x, the input, is zero, the
output is b. 

The slope is the more important measure. It tells how quickly the line
rises (or falls, if the slope is negative). A linear relationship is
defined by its slope. A steep slope means that changes in x
correspond to large changes in y, a shallow slope means the opposite. 

SLIDE

So, let's try to fit a line to this scatterplot. Regression is the
mathematical task of matching a function to a collection of data.
Linear regression is matching a linear function. Trying to draw a line
that best captures the data. I'll draw this line.

What line have I drawn? Here is an equation for a linear regression
generated from this data. Note two things: the intercept and the
slope. The intercepts is 41, which is not terribly relevant here. The
slope is very useful, though. It describes the relationship: for every
cm of length, the head of the possum increases by 0.59mm. The slope
is, in many ways, the relationship. 

Notice the hat over the y. This is a notational reminder that this y
is an approximation. Not all the data fits the line perfectly, of
course. The y-hat notation is a useful reminder that this y is not the
perfect outcome, but a statistical approximation.

SLIDE

This is a linear regression, then: a line meant to fit the data. It
can then be used to make predictions. If I put a body length into the
equation of the line, say 90 cm, then the linear regression predicts a
94.1 millimeter long head. These predictions can then be compared
against future data.

SLIDE

Obviously, the line is an approximation. For each data point, I can
ask how far it is away from the line. This is called the residual.
Each data point has a residual with respect to the linear regression.
For this first data point, if I put x=75 into the line, it predicts
85.25 mm. The actual value is 84.7. The different, y minus y-hat, is
the residual for this data point. In this case, the data is -.55 below
the line: the residual is -0.55.

SLIDE

How was the linear regression determined? This is actually quite a
difficult mathematical problem, and one we'll leave to the statistical
software. However, I want to give you the rough outline, and introduce
an important term. 

The residual is the difference between a data point and the line.
There is one of these for each data point. If I number the data from
one to n (n being the number of cases), then I have all these
residuals. Then I can make this expression: the sum of the squares of
all the residuals.

How is the line chosen? It is chosen to make this number as small as
possible. This is called a least squares regression: it is the line
for which the sum of the squares of the residuals is minimized.
Actually doing the minimization is quite complicated, but you should
understand at least the decision criteria.

Why do we square the residuals? There are several reasons. One is that
is makes everything positive, since it's not important whether the
data is above or below the line. Second is that is emphasizes large
distances. If there are any large residuals, they will have an even
larger impact on this sum when squared. This is discoured in the
method of least squares. There are other reasons as well, which I
won't get into now, but which have to do with mathematical notions of
length and optimization strategies.

SLIDE

That's the idea of linear regression, the important of the slope, and
the least squares method. For the rest of the video, I want to give a
short idea of where else we can go with this method. I can bring more
variables to bear on this analysis. The dataset also includes the age
of the possum, as well as the sex. Here is the scatterplot
colour-coded by the sex variable: red for male and blue for female.
The males have, on average, slightly larger heads for the same body
lengths. I've drawn linear regressions separately for male and female
possums. 

SLIDE

What's going on with these two lines? Well, the first linear
regression was a line y-hat that depended on x, the body length. Maybe
y-hat, depends on more? Maybe it also depends on age and sex? I can
extend this linear regression with more terms that all look like the
slope of a line: a constant times an input variable. This model then
says that the head size is determined by length, age and sex, with
these coefficients being the relationships. Also, sex is a categorical
variable, so to put it in an equation, I need to make it a number.
I'll choose male to be 0 and female to be 1. Doing this makes it
something we call an indicator variable, or sometimes a dummy
variable. By making male set to 0 and female to 1, this term, which
makes all the head sizes 1.66mm smaller, only applies to the females.
For the males, this would multiplication by zero, which is just zero.
This term would not do anything.

SLIDE

Here are the two line again on the separated scatter plot. Ignoring
age for now, I can give a good interpretation, visually, for what this
indicator variable is doing. This -1.66 is just shifting this line by
1.66 units. The female line is the same slope, just slightly lower,
1.66 units exactly, under the male line. For indicator variables,
where each category is arbitrarily set to a number, I can view the
results as shifts of the line up or down. 

The point here is three fold. First, there is mathematics to create a
linear regression by the least squares method: finding the best line
by minimizing the residuals. Second, the numbers in that line carry
statistical meaning: they encode the relationship between the data, at
least approximately. Finally, those relationships can be extended to
more variables. Extending to other numeric variables is just adding
new terms to the equation, but to use categorical variables we have to
assignment numbers to them, making them indicator variables. In all
this, the coefficients carry the meaning of the relationship. 
