This video is a continuation of the last video on linear regression.
Having defined what a linear regression is, I want to do some analysis
of the quality of a regression. What is a good fit and how do we know?

SLIDE

The first measure of quality of a linear regression is correlation.
(Technically, Pearson correlation coefficient, but correlation will do
find for us.) We've already used the word naturally to describe
relationship between variables. Now it also has a technical meaning.
Correlation is a number that describes how well we can model two
variables in a linear relationship. This is exactly what we want in
this video: a measure of how good a linear regression might be. 

Regression is a number between 1 and -1. It has a formal mathematical
definition and calculation method but, like with least squares
last video, I won't cover the mathematical details. We'll let R
generate regression for us, and then focus on the meaning.

r=1 means perfect positive correlation: the data exactly fits a line
with a positive slope. All data points must be right on the line. 

SLIDE

As r decreases, it means that the data is a little bit scatter from a
pure linear relationship. This relationship has r = 0.94: it's pretty
close to matching a line, but there is some deviation from that line. 

SLIDE

As the data gets farther away from matching a line, the correlation
number gets lower. This data set has r = 0.73, notably father from a
linear relationship that the previous, but still displaying good
evidence of some linear relationship. 

SLIDE

An r value very near zero means that there is basically no
correlation. This data set has r = 0.03. This indicate there is a very
slight tendency towards negative correlation, but there is nothing
close to a linear relationship. Indeed, the data is very scattered. 

SLIDE

As r gets closer to -1, the data becomes more linear again, but with a
negative slope correlation. This data clearly has something line a
linear relationship with a negative slope, and r=-0.64 shows that.

SLIDE

Again, as the points get closer and closer to a regression line with
negative slope, the correlation number gets closer to -1. 

SLIDE

Finally, r=-1 is perfect negative correlation. All the points are
exaclty on a line with negative slope.

SLIDE

Finally, this correlation number only measure how well something fits
a linear relationship. This scatter plot has low positive correlation,
r=0.14. There is a very slight positive correlation. However, the
correlation entirely misses the fact that there is another kind of
relationship here. A model for this data would be a shape like this,
rising and then falling. This is not a linear model, so the
correlation number doesn't see it at all. 

In statistics, linear regression is almost always the firs thing to
try. But some data has relationship which are not linear. It's very
valuable to remember that linear models are only one of many kind of
models of relationship between data. 

SLIDE

There is a related value to correlation. This value is simply called
the R^2 value (and it often written with an upper-case R instead of a
lower case r for correlation, which is honestly a bit confusing.)
Sometimes, this is called the coefficient of determination, but I'll
stick to R^2 value. 

R^2 is simply the square or the correlation. Correlation is between -1
and 1, so the square is between 0 and 1, since squares are always
positive. R^2 forgets the different between linear models with
positive and negative slope; instead, it is a better measure of
whether two variables any linear relationship at all. High R^2 (close
to 1) means a strong linear relationship; low R^2 (close to 0) means
very little evidence of a linear relatinship. 

In the last video, I talked briefly about multiple linear regression:
fitting a linear relationship that depended on multiple inputs, not
just one input. There is a version of R^2 for multiple linear
regression as well, which is called adjusted R^2. I measure the same
thing, but across several input variables: how close the relationship
is to a linear relationship. 

SLIDE

Now let me get back to residuals, since these can also be used to
evaluate the quality of a linear regression. Residuals were defined in
the last video: they are the difference, for each data point, bewteen
the actual data, y, and the prediction of the linear regression,
y-hat. There is a residual for each data point: n in total, where n is
the number of cases. 

SLIDE

Here is scatterplot from last video with the linear regression line 41
+ 0.59x. The residuals are the difference between the y coordinate of
the data point and the line. However, residuals are a bit tricky to
see in this form.

SLIDE

Instead, I can just plot the residuals themselves. Here is the same
data set, but the y axis is now the residual compared to the linear
regression. 0 is exactly on the line, this just shows how far above
and below the line each data point is. This is a residual plot. As a
visualization tool, the residual plot is extremely useful to seeing
how good the regression is, since all it shows is the error for each
data point. The shape and patterns of the residual plot can give
information.

In general, if there is not pattern to the residual plot (and the
residuals are not too large), that is good evidence that the original
regression was pretty good. For this data, from the last video, there
isn't much of a pattern to the residual plot, so the linear regression
is probably a decent model of the relationship between the variables. 

SLIDE

Here is another scatter plot. This looks like a pretty good
regression. What does its residual plot look like?

SLIDE

Looks pretty good. Balanced above and below the line, relatively small
residuals, no obvious pattern. This is evidence of a good linear
regression: a line that fits the data well.

SLIDE

Here is a very similar scatter plot. It also looks pretty good. What
does its residual plot look like?

SLIDE

This is a bit different. This residual plot has a bit of a pattern,
starting below, then moving above, then moving below. In the original
scatter plot, the variance of the data from the line was difficult to
read, visually. Here, the residual plot makes that much easier to
read. This is the strength of a residual plot: it zooms in on the
relationship between the data and the line, and can clearly show
things that were present in the original scatterplot, but much harder
to see. In this case, the relationship is still close to linear, but
this pattern means that there is probably something else going on here
as well, something non-linear between the two variables.

SLIDE

Lastly, residual plots can help understand the effect of outlier on a
linear regression. Here is a scatter plot with an outlier. This
outlier happens to be right on the linea regression line. 

SLIDE

Here is the matching residual plot. You can see the outlier over here.
The rest of the residual plot looks pretty good: no strong pattern,
data balances above and below the line. This outlier, though it may be
strange for other reasons, it no detrimentally affecting the
regression.

SLIDE

Here is another scatter plot, with an outlier well away from the
linear regression. The rest of this looks like a good fit, but it's
hard to read on the scatterplot.

SLIDE

Here is the residual plot. This makes it a bit more clear that the
outlier is having an effect. If the outlier is removed, more of these
points are below the line, and farther below the line. The outlier is
essentially pulling the line up just by itself. This can happen in
linear regression. 

At this point, a researcher would have to make a judgement about this
outlier. It is naturally part of the data? Or is it an error, which
could come from any number of sources (measurement error, data entry
error, bad experimental design that allowed in one eroneous data
point, and so on.) If there is such an argument, the the outlier
should be expluded and the line adjusted so that the residual plot
becomes more balanced. However, if the outlier does actually below,
then it means something and shouldn't be removed. As is the case so
often in this course, it comes down to judgement, experimental design,
and careful skepticism. 




